[Unknown]: IVM.
[Amit Varma]: Before you listen to this episode of the scene in the unseen, I have a recommendation for you.
[Amit Varma]: Do check out Pulya Bazi, hosted by Saurabh Chandra and Pranay Kotesane,
[Amit Varma]: two really good friends of mine. Kick-ass podcast in Hindi. It's amazing.
[Amit Varma]: More than a decade ago, in 2007, I wrote a column with the title The Matunga Racket.
[Amit Varma]: The Matunga Racket was a scam run by the police that a gay friend of mine told me about.
[Amit Varma]: This was how it functioned. Cops would go to this online messaging board for gay people.
[Amit Varma]: This was in the days before smartphones and Grindr. A cop would pretend that he was looking
[Amit Varma]: to hook up. He would lure his victim to Dadar railway station at a particular time.
[Amit Varma]: A plainclothes cop would complete the rendezvous and be joined by other cops,
[Amit Varma]: who would then drag their unsuspecting victim, some poor bloke who wanted nothing more than
[Amit Varma]: a memorable consensual encounter, and take him to King Circle police station. There,
[Amit Varma]: they would threaten to book him under section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, which effectively
[Amit Varma]: made homosexual sex illegal. If he was a young man, as he often was, they could even threaten
[Amit Varma]: to call his parents. Then they would make him empty his pockets, and often they'd take him
[Amit Varma]: to a nearby ATM, force him to use his ATM card, and take as much as they wanted.
[Amit Varma]: The point of that column of mine was to talk about the criminalizing of victimless crimes
[Amit Varma]: with laws like 377, then used by the cops as a tool for extortion. What is the police after all,
[Amit Varma]: but a legal mafia with a monopoly on violence. Now, since section 377 is no longer on the books,
[Amit Varma]: you'd imagine that we've solved that particular problem. Not really. Gay people in India may not
[Amit Varma]: be terrorized by a bad law, but they are still shackled by social attitudes that look upon
[Amit Varma]: homosexuality as a dangerous aberration, even a disease, and many young people grow up with guilt
[Amit Varma]: about their secret desires, a guilt that should be as unnecessary as, say, guilt about being left
[Amit Varma]: handed. Millions of people in our country carry this burden with them every day, this burden of
[Amit Varma]: shame when there should be no shame, this burden of hiding something about yourself from a family
[Amit Varma]: that otherwise embraces you as you are. Those born to privilege can find ways of escaping this
[Amit Varma]: burden. But most gay people in this country, even if they now do not have a law dangling over their
[Unknown]: heads, still spend their lives in prison. Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast
[Unknown]: on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen. My guest today is my friend Vivek Tejuja, who has just
[Amit Varma]: come out with his first book. So now you know, growing up gay in India. This is a charming
[Amit Varma]: memoir of growing up gay in India. And while it's written in a deceptively breezy, lighthearted way,
[Amit Varma]: I also found it to be a deeply moving book. Vivek and I have met just a handful of times,
[Amit Varma]: and our online friendship is actually based on a love of books. Vivek makes his living writing
[Amit Varma]: about books and his transparent, infectious love for books has often made me rush to Amazon right
[Amit Varma]: after reading a review or a tweet by him. So some of our conversation today will be about the
[Amit Varma]: literature and poetry that we enjoy. But much of it will be about the brilliant book that he's just
[Amit Varma]: written. Before I begin chatting with Vivek, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Did you know that Parsis in Mumbai, instead of being left at the Tower of Silence after they die,
[Amit Varma]: are now cremated? And why? Because a cow fell sick in the early 1990s? Did you know that the
[Amit Varma]: smog in Delhi is caused by something that farmers in Punjab do, and that there's no way to stop
[Amit Varma]: them? Did you know that there wasn't one gas tragedy in Bhopal, but three? One of them was
[Amit Varma]: seen but two were unseen? Did you know that many well-intentioned government policies hurt the
[Amit Varma]: people they're supposed to help? Why was demonetization a bad idea? How should GST have
[Amit Varma]: been implemented? Why are all our politicians so corrupt when not all of them are bad people?
[Amit Varma]: I'm Amit Verma, and in my weekly podcast, The Seen and the Unseen, I take a shot at answering
[Amit Varma]: all these questions and many more. I aim to go beyond the scene and show you the unseen effects
[Amit Varma]: of public policy and private action. I speak to experts on economics, political philosophy,
[Amit Varma]: cognitive neuroscience and constitutional law, so that the insights can blow not only my mind,
[Amit Varma]: but also yours. The Seen and the Unseen releases every Monday. So do check out the archives and
[Amit Varma]: follow the show at seenunseen.in. You can also subscribe to The Seen and the Unseen on whatever
[Amit Varma]: podcast app you happen to prefer. Vivek, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Guest]: Hey, hi, Amit. Thanks. Thanks. Happy to be here.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about how this book came about.
[Guest]: So, you know, in 2009, about 10 years ago, I was just working on a couple of chapters. And
[Guest]: it just started with the memory of which is also there in the book of me and a couple of gay men
[Guest]: going to Gorai for a trip. And at that time, like you mentioned, it was totally unheard of for
[Guest]: someone. And I just met one of them once. And I was so taken in by him and his charm. And it was
[Guest]: not even him that I chatted with online, I chatted with a friend of his that I wasn't interested in.
[Guest]: And he introduced me to this fellow, Tori, and I absolutely got taken in by him. And I was like,
[Guest]: okay, you know what, let's do this. Let's go on a trip. And that trip memory, which is in detail in
[Guest]: the book just evoked the chapter that I first wrote. And then I just started writing chapter
[Guest]: after chapter. And this was then shelved for 10 years or more. 10 years, yeah, a little less than
[Guest]: 10 years still. The book was supposed to be a young adult fiction book with another publisher,
[Guest]: who then decided not to publish it in the memoir form, because they had some objection. And then
[Guest]: the book went to HarperCollins, my editor Udayan picked it up and he loved it. And that's how this
[Guest]: book came to be. And that's how I wrote this book. And I added more chapters to those chapters.
[Guest]: So yeah, and so it's a very short book. So yeah. Yeah, I enjoyed reading it thoroughly. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: my only criticism, as I told you was that it was too short. It got over when I was just
[Amit Varma]: settled in. And I thought, okay, a little more of it would have been really nice. Did you always
[Guest]: kind of want to be a writer or? No, actually, but in a way, it was just one of those very
[Guest]: lofty dreams that one has, while growing up, when you read other books, and you are so taken in by
[Guest]: the love of literature that you're like, okay, one day, I'm going to be a writer. So the story
[Guest]: there is that my father gifted me and he didn't even realize what he was gifting me. I was about
[Guest]: 14, 15. And he handed me a book called Sisters by Shobha Dey. Okay, I don't know what this is,
[Guest]: but it just felt close to home, not because of the affluence, but just because they had an Indian
[Guest]: characters. It had Indian sex, it had everything. And I was like, okay. And then I finished the book
[Guest]: and at the end of the book I had written, one day I want to be published. You know, I want to write
[Guest]: and then that's how it came about. And this was way back in 1998-1997. What do you mean Indian
[Guest]: sex? Sex between Indian characters or something specific? Sex between Indian characters and I
[Guest]: never read it in a book. Nobody used to write books like these where there was sex between
[Guest]: two characters and Shobha Dey was all out and I actually enjoyed her after that. I actually read
[Guest]: all her books. And I was like, why am I reading this shit after a couple of years? But then you
[Amit Varma]: know what, it's good shit. So I loved it. It's good shit in a sense, she is delightfully
[Guest]: unpretentious. There are no literary airs or illusions. And I wanted to write in the same
[Guest]: vein. And that's why this book is so simple. Because it's not. I'm glad that it also ends
[Amit Varma]: when it ends because I intended it to be short. Let's kind of go to the book and the subject of
[Amit Varma]: the book and kind of growing up gay. And, you know, I'd done an episode before on this with
[Amit Varma]: Naveen Nirona, who of course hosts the podcast Keeping it Queer, even you've done an episode
[Amit Varma]: with him, which we'll link from the show notes. So growing up, I mean, one of the interesting
[Amit Varma]: things I found about your book was that you were also sort of born to privilege in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: and aware of that privilege. Oh, yes, completely. And how did you know, when did you become aware
[Guest]: of being gay, that there was a difference? I think I was eight. Honestly, I was about
[Guest]: eight or nine. And I would watch these videos. Or I would watch there would be cassettes brought
[Guest]: at home of Hindi movies or Bollywood. And I remember watching a movie of Vinod Khanna in it.
[Guest]: And he was shirtless on the beach in his trunks. And it was Gurbani, I think. And I fell in love
[Guest]: with what I saw. I fell in lust, actually. I don't know at nine if you can fall in lust.
[Guest]: But I knew that, you know, I couldn't care about a Zeenat Aman in a bikini. I mean,
[Guest]: it just didn't matter. And then just incidents and instances kept getting piled on one after
[Guest]: the other. And while boys in school were talking about girls, I was thinking about other boys,
[Guest]: pretending to talk about girls. And I was like, Okay, I think I know. I didn't have a term for
[Guest]: it. I didn't know. It was homosexuality. I didn't know it was being gay. I didn't know any of that.
[Guest]: I just knew that. Yeah. And I couldn't even ask or tell anyone. So it became a little difficult
[Amit Varma]: to give a name. Did you feel that? Oh, I mean, what's going on? There's something wrong with me?
[Guest]: Or? Oh, yeah, completely. Completely. I just wanted to fit to mainstream. Because everywhere
[Guest]: around you, as you grew up, you see heteronormativity. And that's what I wanted. I
[Guest]: wanted a wife. I wanted four kids. I wanted a house. I wanted a nine to five job. I wanted
[Guest]: everything that my father had. Until you saw Vinod Khanna without a shirt. Yeah. And I was like,
[Guest]: Okay, now I don't think I didn't know whether I wanted him or I wanted the straight life,
[Guest]: so to say. But but I guess over a period of time, with whatever you go through,
[Guest]: and whatever you internal conflict, and you just figure along the way that you know,
[Amit Varma]: this is what you want. And this is what you do not want. It's a kind of an overlap between these two
[Amit Varma]: phases, like one, because you're looking at your father, and you're looking at all the
[Amit Varma]: heteronormative stuff. And you're looking at Bollywood romances, and you're thinking,
[Amit Varma]: Oh, okay, that's the way it's going to go. And then you discover this.
[Guest]: So the only overlap was that, when I discovered and then as I went into my as I entered my teens,
[Guest]: I just because of the heteronormativity, all I wanted to do was be a woman.
[Guest]: I equated that there was a man and there's a woman. Right. So while being gay, I never thought
[Guest]: of it as two men. So at that time, now, of course, things are very different. You're more aware and
[Guest]: more aware and you read and you interact and you grow with the world, and the people around you.
[Guest]: But at that time, it was just a dream to be married, even to another man without realizing
[Guest]: the laws without realizing. So this is the kind of privilege I'm talking about, right? You don't
[Guest]: was so mollycoddled, you're so cushioned, that you don't realize
[Guest]: you mentioned in your book, you were the Raja Beta.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, clearly. And, and it was sickening after a point, because then they just invaded
[Guest]: my life. They wanted to know everything, nothing was hidden, except for this one thing, which was
[Guest]: hidden for a very long time, till I came out at 18 in frustration, because a man rejected my
[Guest]: advances or rejected me. And I just didn't know what to do. I was so mad at him that I was like,
[Guest]: okay, I was angry. And then I decided to come out.
[Amit Varma]: You begin your book with an incident which you then allude to later, which is basically you saw
[Amit Varma]: the film Sarak and you were attracted to the character of Maharani.
[Amit Varma]: No, I wasn't attracted to the character. But I quite liked what I watched on screen.
[Amit Varma]: And then you went home and you imitated him and your uncle slapped you. Everybody was,
[Amit Varma]: and you were stunned by that. And you've written in your book, quote, one incident is all it takes
[Amit Varma]: for you to not confide in your loved ones, stop quote. And from that point on, it's, it's like,
[Amit Varma]: it's a secret. You can't even tell your family about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's true. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you also, you know, you write in your book that Bollywood was a sort of a big influence on
[Amit Varma]: you. It had a big effect on you, which is very interesting, because one is a heteronormativity,
[Amit Varma]: which you've pointed to that it will show male female relations in a typical cliched way.
[Amit Varma]: And even there is basically it's not even healthy relationships. A lot of it is just
[Amit Varma]: toxic masculinity. All of it is very toxic. So it's just that one very toxic prism coming
[Amit Varma]: through even for women. And the other part of it was how they treat gay characters. So
[Amit Varma]: how was it for you where your big influences in your life are Bollywood, which is most of the
[Amit Varma]: popular culture that you're then consuming, and seeing how they treat gay characters after you
[Guest]: figure out that you're gay yourself?
[Guest]: Yes, it was very problematic. Because in my head, then I didn't want to be associated with those
[Guest]: characters, which I've also mentioned in the book, like Pinku from Maskalandar or Maharani
[Guest]: from Sadak. Or even the way Dostana years and years later, when it came out, I was very,
[Guest]: very upset with that movie, that how they were depicting. But then I also realized that
[Guest]: they don't know any better. And how Bollywood played a major role is because in my house,
[Guest]: there was nothing but screen used to come as a newspaper, as a weekly newspaper then.
[Guest]: And everybody would just read that. There were only Bollywood magazines, from Stardust to
[Guest]: Cineblitz to Filmfare and movie and it was just that. That was the consumption. And which is
[Guest]: until of course, my mother decided to put an end to that. And you know, while that was also going
[Guest]: on, she decided to involve me more in the world of books and literature. And that's where the
[Guest]: love began. But I think, and Bollywood upset me for a very long time. But then I decided that
[Guest]: I also wanted to be a part of the fantastical world. I want to be immersed in that fantasy so
[Guest]: desperately that you know, I wanted to probably just be with Akshay Kumar when I when I watched
[Guest]: him shirtless or also there were those other romantic ideas of how Rishi Kapoor was wooing
[Guest]: Sridevi in Chandni. Or how it was in Lamhe, you know, when you're pining for a lover.
[Guest]: And you were a big Sridevi fan.
[Guest]: Oh yeah, completely. Still am. And how you're pining for your lover and how,
[Guest]: you know, you're longing, I think, I think it was just the feeling of longing.
[Guest]: The romance.
[Guest]: The romance, more than the romance, I think the unrequited love, because if one thing that game
[Guest]: and know most than most men out there is unrequited love. I mean, I could be wrong,
[Guest]: but from personal experience, I feel is just so looming large or loomed large then.
[Guest]: But but as you grow, you start seeing things with a different perspective, which helps.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what must just thinking aloud what must make that unrequited love a worse problem than it
[Amit Varma]: is for the toxic in cells who are among the straight men who otherwise roam our countryside
[Amit Varma]: is that the pool of available choices to you is far less like if I'm a straight person,
[Amit Varma]: and I see and I'm attracted to a woman, you know, it's something that I can think about
[Amit Varma]: and consider. And it's fair game if you're both single. But for you, most men are also out of
[Amit Varma]: bounds. I mean, how do you even is that something that is a I mean, that goes beyond unrequited
[Guest]: love? It's just, I think maybe that's why we assert our sexuality so much. Like we want
[Guest]: other men to know at least wanted them to know that we are gay, that we are available,
[Guest]: that we are single. I mean, the flamboyance and the assertion and the entire drama associated with
[Guest]: us comes from that latent to be seen, you know, and not to be unseen. To be seen to be visible,
[Guest]: I think it is so important. Because in your head, how will people know that you're gay?
[Guest]: How will a man then want to show interest in you? If he is gay? How do you how do you see the signs?
[Guest]: Do you write it on your forehead and walk on the street? Do you sashay your hips when you're
[Guest]: walking? Do you do you show it in your talk? Do you be soft and genteel and a little high pitch
[Guest]: in your voice? How do you show like I remember somebody telling me that in Marine Drive people
[Guest]: used to wear white kerchiefs on their right wrist to indicate their sexuality and cruise that way
[Guest]: or you cruise and then you speak through eyes and you speak through expression and at right
[Guest]: opposite Taj Mahal, what Gateway of India wall used to be called the wall and people used to
[Guest]: cruise there. They used to cruise in every local platform loo. And that's when these cops used to
[Guest]: go masquerading online and then, you know, sort of nab them. We had only voodoo, which I've also
[Guest]: mentioned in the book. And then it is it was a crazy time because how and then coming back to
[Guest]: that, right, you just had to be seen to be able to get sex, love, or both in good combination or
[Guest]: anything that you wanted, like in the so called straight world or the heterosexual world. People
[Guest]: take it for granted, right? You see a woman or a woman sees you, you're seen to each other. Yeah,
[Guest]: there's nothing like the unseen. But here you have to present yourselves. And that's when you know,
[Guest]: from all your choices, the way you dress, to the way you talk, to the way you walk, to what you're
[Guest]: reading, to what interests you have to all of that, you want some way of signaling that you're
[Guest]: not interested in sports. So for the longest time, in the 90s, if you were a boy, you have to be
[Guest]: interested in sports. And the minute you're not, then something is wrong with you. And that wrong,
[Guest]: I wanted to convert the advantage of being right for me, so that somebody could pick it up. And I
[Guest]: could perhaps be with that someone. But how do you signal a disinterest in sports? You make it very
[Guest]: clear. Yeah, you're very loud about it. Like with my parents, I was extremely clear. My mother used
[Guest]: to force me to go down and play a sport. But she's like, oh, sport leads to teamwork, it leads to
[Guest]: building character and blah, blah, blah. And I'm like, no, I'm just bored. It tires me and I don't
[Guest]: want to do this. I just want to be this lazy boy and sit at home and read. Which sounds like an
[Amit Varma]: excuse not of a gay man, but also a Bengali man. I mean, half Bengali. I mean, who wants to
[Guest]: do physical activity and sweat? I'm sorry, I don't want to perspire. I just don't I'm, I'm, I'm not,
[Guest]: I'm just averse to the idea of my pores, emitting something that I don't want on my on my skin.
[Amit Varma]: That's all. And you mentioned voodoo. And there's a nice quote about voodoo in your book, which I'll
[Amit Varma]: again read out, quote, voodoo makes you not want to look in the mirror. Once you get out from there,
[Amit Varma]: there is this heavy sadness in the air, in the low ceiling, the expression that is still muted.
[Amit Varma]: And with all the strangers, it doesn't make it much easier. Stop good and voodoo, of course,
[Amit Varma]: is this gay club that you went to to meet people and yet there was no option you all of you had to
[Guest]: be there because how else do you? Yeah, initially, till gay Bombay party started. And then you went
[Guest]: on and even there, there was such a class difference. Like there was something called
[Guest]: Salvation Star, which was just for the South Bombayites. Oh, and if you were say from
[Guest]: out of South Bombay, and you would come to that party,
[Guest]: somehow they would sense you, I think they would smell you that you're not from South Bombay.
[Guest]: The other. Yeah, the other and they would treat you like that.
[Guest]: Well, and you would be shunned into a corner and nobody would show any interest in you.
[Guest]: And then there was a gay Bombay party culture at Velocity in Tarde, where every Saturday,
[Guest]: there used to be a party. And just the idea of going there with your other friends,
[Guest]: or with your friends and just dancing to item songs and, and just living, getting drunk and
[Guest]: to be able to grind against each other, a stranger even and make out on the dance floor.
[Guest]: It just gives you such a sense of liberation. And this is all pre 377. Yeah, we just absolutely
[Guest]: snatched what we got. At least I did that. I remember my moments of just snatching,
[Guest]: of just grabbing with both hands and not being apologetic about it at all. And I guess privilege
[Guest]: had a very big role to play. Because in my head, I knew that I was cushioned and comfort
[Guest]: was there to whatever extent back home. So I could manage to put myself out here and do this.
[Amit Varma]: But it must have been much harder, for example, from the non South Bombay types who happened to
[Amit Varma]: come to the Salvation Star party. And what do you do? I mean, it's, I think you, you have added
[Guest]: insecurities, you learn, you find your own tribe. Because it's so important to find your tribe
[Guest]: when you're like, for me, while growing up in college, I was dying to speak with another gay
[Guest]: boy. And I literally thought to take a quote from Little Britain, that I was the only gay man in the
[Guest]: village. There was nobody else. And it frustrated me no end till of course, internet came about.
[Guest]: And I was like, Oh, there are other people. And there are other people very close by.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess the internet came at just the right time. And how has the internet changed things?
[Amit Varma]: Like are there still gay Bombay meetups? Is that still a necessity?
[Guest]: Gay Bombay parties? Yeah, sure. Sure, sure. Those still go on. But now I've stopped going.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned that there are more hookup apps for gay men than for straight men.
[Guest]: Gay men are everywhere. Gay people are everywhere. We are on Tinder, we are on Grindr,
[Guest]: which is exclusively for us. We are on something called Planet Romeo. We are on Bumble. We are on
[Guest]: Hinge. Yeah, everywhere. And I think also with 377 gone, a lot of men are coming out.
[Guest]: They are coming out as bi curious. I don't know what that means. Or as curious or as bisexual or
[Guest]: whatever label they want to give themselves. But they also making themselves seen that you know,
[Guest]: this is us. And you know, we are out here. Actually, people have it on their Twitter profile,
[Guest]: that they're bi curious, bi poly, bi curious, bisexual, trying to figure trying to navigate
[Guest]: waters. Again, I don't know what that means. But, but yeah, I think it's a very good thing that
[Amit Varma]: all of this is happening. It's a great thing that a lot of people who had these sort of
[Amit Varma]: repressed feelings can now just come out in the open. And like a friend of mine was recently
[Amit Varma]: telling me and he's otherwise I've known him as heterosexual. He has a girlfriend and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But he said that he wanted to go to Grindr and check it out and see what the curiosity, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it's interesting. And how the expectation is set with two men. But I've only known men,
[Guest]: right? That, that how it's either going to be this or that, or something else. So I think it's so
[Guest]: clear the communication is transparently transactional. So there's nothing else.
[Guest]: Yeah. Like you move with the idea, like if somebody says he's, he's a little discreet or
[Guest]: closeted or whatever, you know, he's not going to give you his number, you have to still go by
[Guest]: the trust factor and meet him where he wants you to meet him, if you're interested,
[Guest]: if there's been a conversation, if there's some chemistry. So you have to take that risk. Like
[Guest]: earlier, though, I wouldn't be able to see a picture of somebody online because people wouldn't,
[Guest]: there's to be no option of sharing pictures. You just met. And then you took it from there.
[Amit Varma]: And so you didn't even know who you were meeting.
[Amit Varma]: You have an account of a date you had at just around the corner, which, which again,
[Amit Varma]: makes me very nostalgic, because just around the corner is like a defines a certain time in Bombay
[Amit Varma]: and a certain time in Bandra. And he had portrayed himself as I think being very tall, and he turned
[Guest]: out to be really short, very short. Yeah. And you still went along.
[Guest]: I was, I was in a sense desperate. I was young. I was horny. I was desperate.
[Guest]: And, and I just wanted to experience everything.
[Amit Varma]: You also got a very interesting account of how you seduced a straight man.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, at Cafe Mondega.
[Amit Varma]: So what happened there?
[Guest]: I think it was a very unusual evening. Things, all the chips fell into place. I didn't, I didn't
[Guest]: even plan it that it would go this way. I thought he would slap me. I thought I'm done for. He was
[Guest]: this huge Delhi boy. And I was like, Oh, my God. And that time I was scared of Delhi boys. I mean,
[Guest]: I was like, okay, you know, and I'm trying to take him home. That was another kettle of fish
[Guest]: all together. So I think we just, I was just a little brave and stupid. Because it could have
[Guest]: gone anywhere. I could have just not been here. I could have been murdered in the taxi or something.
[Guest]: And I say it with all earnestness, because these things used to happen. People wouldn't know about
[Guest]: it. I think a lot of gay hate crime was very prevalent. I don't know if it still is.
[Guest]: Have you experienced any of that?
[Guest]: I've experienced verbal hate. A lot of it. I mean, in school, college, bullying.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of the painful parts of your book is where you know, for a few pages, you describe
[Amit Varma]: your first crush, this friend called Deepak and then he is the first person to call you a faggot
[Guest]: one day.
[Guest]: Yes, yes, because of whatever influence of other boys and extremely painful. I mean,
[Guest]: the fact that I still remember it the way I do after all these years, should say something but,
[Guest]: but yeah, but these things happened. And I don't know if they happened to every gay boy growing up.
[Guest]: But universally, yes, these things happen.
[Amit Varma]: And, and, you know, so let's, let's take this opportunity to sort of go back to your school
[Amit Varma]: days where you talk about how okay, you had a sheltered life at home and everything is fine.
[Amit Varma]: But then you go to school and everything changes. And again, quote from your book,
[Amit Varma]: quote, consider this, a boy who has never been short on confidence, suddenly finds himself at
[Amit Varma]: a loss for words when it comes to defending himself at school. He just cannot speak.
[Amit Varma]: He has no idea what has beset his life. And before he can call out for his dad or mom,
[Amit Varma]: he is surrounded by bullies, bullies who do not lose a single opportunity to make his life
[Amit Varma]: miserable, stop quote. And to some extent that this is because the sense that
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, I think I think children, like we all know, can be very crude. And they have,
[Guest]: they have the sense that perhaps adults just do not, this instinct that something is off in a way
[Guest]: that this person is different. Like, I think it just started from the time I refused to
[Guest]: be in any sports club or engage beyond like, I wouldn't want to wrestle in the mud.
[Guest]: I wouldn't want to pick a fight just for no reason. So the angst or teenage angst just got
[Guest]: channelized in other ways. So I think they picked on that a very, very, they didn't know.
[Guest]: And children know. And they know how to pick on weaknesses, just like Lord of the Flies.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, which is very accurate.
[Guest]: Yeah. And they just, so I felt like piggy. Just that, I think I came out of it
[Guest]: a sane at the end of it all.
[Guest]: How did you navigate your school years?
[Guest]: I hid. And I did a very good job of hiding. So the dichotomy there, right? I mean, in school,
[Guest]: you want to be hidden. But the minute you're out of school, and you're exploring your sexuality,
[Guest]: you just want to be seen. So, and seen in a way that, that again, you don't want to be seen
[Guest]: out there. But in a very subtle manner that
[Amit Varma]: you want people who are looking for it to know that
[Guest]: Yeah, that you're giving it. Yeah, that you're available.
[Unknown]: Did you know any other gay boys in school?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: Which is weird, because just going by the percentages, there must have been a few.
[Guest]: Of course, a more than few. I don't want to name my school, but notorious.
[Guest]: Notorious in the sense that people say, Oh, a lot of homosexuals in your school.
[Guest]: Oh, really? I didn't know anyone. I wish I did. But sometimes even the bullies, right?
[Guest]: Could be. And they may not even have known that about themselves, unfortunately.
[Guest]: Or some hidden kind of self loathing, which is expressing itself.
[Guest]: And yeah, so a lot of psychological drama. So yeah, thank God it wasn't a boarding school.
[Guest]: Because I wouldn't have been able to survive that.
[Amit Varma]: Are you in touch with any of your school friends?
[Amit Varma]: No, not at all.
[Guest]: I don't have school friends. So yeah, I think I put a stop to that very clearly.
[Guest]: Once I was out of there.
[Amit Varma]: And how was college? Where did you go to college?
[Guest]: Right here in Bombay.
[Guest]: Okay. How was college?
[Guest]: College was a lot of fun in the sense, I studied literature. And it was great.
[Guest]: I was immersed in books. My professors were very, very kind.
[Guest]: And I went to St. Xavier's. So yeah, so it was a lot of fun.
[Guest]: It was something that was so different. It was, yeah, but again, in college, right?
[Guest]: The friends that were there were very far and few.
[Guest]: I never made friends in school and college, which was very strange.
[Guest]: I don't know why. I thought I was popular.
[Guest]: But of course, I wasn't. Because I was very quiet.
[Guest]: And I wouldn't mingle.
[Guest]: And later when I decided that, okay, now it's the time to meet people, to make a friend.
[Guest]: I think I found people who thought in a similar fashion or who, you know, were there for me.
[Guest]: And they continue to be there. So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So was that sort of initial not making friends or whatever?
[Amit Varma]: Was it because you were generally a quiet introverted person?
[Amit Varma]: Or did your own sense of your gayness also have a part to play in it?
[Guest]: So I think in college, I was very, very inhibited.
[Guest]: I think it was just, like I said, right, when you can't,
[Guest]: when you just wait to speak to someone who is like you, and that's not there,
[Guest]: then you feel a sense of loss.
[Guest]: I mean, for how long could I just speak with friends who were women and not be able to tell them?
[Guest]: Like I also mentioned a very close friend of mine, Em, and how she,
[Guest]: how I fell in love with her, because I was so in denial for the longest time.
[Guest]: You've written about your yearning to be straight. Yeah.
[Guest]: And I watched City of Angels with her.
[Guest]: And then I proposed, for some strange reason, I just proposed.
[Guest]: And, and then when she found out that I was gay,
[Guest]: she broke down because she thought that I had a thing for her,
[Guest]: when though she wasn't really interested.
[Guest]: So there's a very, very complex situation that played itself out.
[Guest]: And I don't know why I did what I did, but I did.
[Guest]: Maybe because we are spending so much time together that I thought
[Guest]: that I could, you know, veer in that direction.
[Guest]: And, and that never came to be.
[Guest]: So, yeah, I mean, I used to look at, I, like I said, right,
[Guest]: and I keep saying I wanted the straight life because it felt so complete.
[Guest]: But, but thank God that didn't happen in my life.
[Guest]: I'm very happy for the, for the lack of it.
[Amit Varma]: And like a related question that comes up is that because being gay in India is so difficult,
[Amit Varma]: so difficult, how much does going through that experience, right,
[Amit Varma]: difficulty rather than being a difficulty in being gay in India,
[Amit Varma]: go on to define who you are as a person or shape who you are as a person.
[Amit Varma]: For example, in my case, I know that my sexual orientation
[Amit Varma]: has absolutely nothing to do with who I am.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it hasn't shaped me in any way.
[Amit Varma]: I don't have to modify my behavior because of it.
[Amit Varma]: I don't have to be wary of what I say to people or,
[Amit Varma]: or, you know, consider carefully the signals that I send out.
[Amit Varma]: So my orientation hasn't shaped me because I can just take it for granted.
[Amit Varma]: How has it worked for you?
[Guest]: So I think my orientation shaped me in a very positive way in the sense that
[Guest]: the cultural references and the pop culture impact
[Guest]: or the impact of arts when it came to my life was just something else.
[Guest]: And when I discovered Giovanni's room, or when I discovered Madonna on MTV,
[Guest]: and that was a revelation.
[Guest]: That was, I was like, wow.
[Guest]: But why a revelation for you?
[Guest]: Because for me, I'll tell you why.
[Guest]: Because when I would watch someone like her with such unabashed confidence
[Guest]: and with such glory in the performance and speaking what she did about,
[Guest]: which is of sex and love and, you know, being who you are and accepting yourself the way you are,
[Guest]: that hit a chord.
[Guest]: And that hit such a strong nerve that you feel that confidence in some way.
[Guest]: You feel that there's an ally, even though you don't know her,
[Guest]: and you still know her so well, just like Sridevi.
[Guest]: You just feel that these people or these celebrities are just allies.
[Guest]: They are your friends.
[Guest]: You could perhaps have a conversation with them in your head and be so comfortable about it.
[Guest]: You know, and the same thing when it came to books, like Tennessee Williams,
[Guest]: when I discovered A Streetcar Named Desire, or Cat on a Hot Tin Roof,
[Guest]: or a movie like Gone with the Wind, which was something so empowering about that film,
[Guest]: even though it has its problems, the book and the movie.
[Guest]: But just to see Scarlett O'Hara pick a pound of earth in her hand and say,
[Guest]: I'm never going to go hungry again, instilled something in me that just shook me out of my wits.
[Guest]: And I was like, you know, it's okay.
[Guest]: I mean, if these people can do what they are doing and living the life, so can you.
[Guest]: And that impact on the orientation was so strong that the rest didn't matter, really.
[Guest]: Like when I first watched Maury's, back then when star movies was the good old star movies.
[Amit Varma]: Early 90s, I think, yeah.
[Guest]: And post 1130, they would show movies with a lot of graphic content,
[Guest]: and a lot of nudity.
[Guest]: And Maury's was one of them, produced by Merchant Ivory Productions.
[Guest]: And I fell in love.
[Guest]: And it wasn't because of the lust, but I think just the fact that this is possible.
[Guest]: And it spoke to me on so many levels, talking to me about, you know,
[Guest]: being who you are in a world that probably will take time to accept you.
[Guest]: And then acceptance didn't become a matter of concern at all.
[Guest]: It was there, of course, in a very latent manner, it was there.
[Guest]: But that wasn't the agenda at all.
[Guest]: The agenda was perhaps just to live and navigate and figure and meet more people like you
[Guest]: and understand and share stories and figure it out and make your mistakes.
[Guest]: I have made so many mistakes with the men that I've met, the choices, but it's okay.
[Amit Varma]: It's been a great journey so far.
[Amit Varma]: Almost counterintuitive, what you just told me in the sense that you're saying that it kind of
[Amit Varma]: made you stronger and more comfortable in your own skin, you know, and helped you get past sort
[Amit Varma]: of the anxieties that humans feel.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned Maury's, so like, what are the sort of early works of art,
[Amit Varma]: like books or films or whatever, which showed normal gay relationships,
[Amit Varma]: and not in that whole Bollywood caricature-ish, maskalander kind of thing?
[Guest]: So I think even, so when, you know, I read this book by Raj Rao called The Boyfriend,
[Guest]: and The Boyfriend, to me, felt a little maudlin in the sense that,
[Guest]: again, it spoke about the cruising culture, it spoke about people from different classes
[Guest]: coming together, and then trying to make sense of what they were feeling towards each other.
[Guest]: I think the sense of attraction, and the sense of desire was so strong in these works,
[Guest]: that you start relating on a very different level, like you read books written by
[Guest]: heterosexual men and women trying to find gay characters in it.
[Guest]: And you can't, because they are not equipped to perhaps write about it.
[Guest]: But when you see Gore Vidal's The City and the Pillar, and you then tend to
[Guest]: find homosexual authors or writers who happened to be gay,
[Guest]: and you can't ask the librarian in your college, because she'd be mighty scandalized.
[Guest]: And there's no Google back in the day.
[Guest]: And there's no Google. So what do you do? You just figure, you just find,
[Guest]: you read synopsis after synopsis, and try and see that, you know, will you find gay literature?
[Guest]: Will you find good, solid gay literature to tide you through?
[Guest]: Like when I thought, when somebody told me, a friend, that a suitable boy has
[Guest]: some, you know, gay sex, or gay intimacy, I knew I had to read it.
[Guest]: And that might have been the driving force.
[Guest]: But of course, ultimately, I loved the book, or that the Golden Gate has a bisexual character.
[Guest]: So you only want to read because you want to find out that, you know, what it is about me.
[Guest]: What is it about me that, that makes me different or, or what I don't care about anymore?
[Guest]: Or I give up caring about because it doesn't make sense anymore.
[Guest]: So I think these works of art and these books and movies and, and perhaps lives of people,
[Guest]: just instilled this confidence layer by layer, which had, of course,
[Guest]: shattered over a period of time because of the bullying and all of that.
[Guest]: And I was like, okay, let's pick up and see where we go from here.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's interesting, because I've read and loved a suitable boy many, many, many years,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, when it came out, basically, and I cannot remember a gay scene, which
[Guest]: It wasn't a gay scene, it was just intimacy between two characters.
[Amit Varma]: I can't remember that either. And that's very interesting, because like I recorded an episode
[Amit Varma]: few weeks back with Ira Mukherjee, which will probably release after this about women in
[Amit Varma]: history. And she talks about how, when she reads a lot of history, because she her gaze is open to
[Amit Varma]: it, she will find interesting women characters and interesting things happening to women,
[Amit Varma]: which men reading the same history simply won't even notice it's like something happening on the
[Amit Varma]: side. And it's not interesting, but she's looking for it. And so she can see it. And so it's
[Amit Varma]: interesting that there's that added layer to the way that you're sort of reading this stuff.
[Guest]: Yeah. So I think I think when you when you want to look for things, they make them
[Guest]: themselves shown in a way to you that, that perhaps other readers, every reader is different,
[Guest]: right? So another reader might catch on to something and I might catch on to something else.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah,
[Amit Varma]: We'll, we'll talk about books a little later in the show, but sort of going back to
[Amit Varma]: sort of your growing up years, you know, you've described how it was with school,
[Amit Varma]: where you're basically you're getting bullied, and you're trying to be unobtrusive. And then
[Amit Varma]: in college, you gradually open up a little bit, but how was it like at home? Like,
[Amit Varma]: as far as your family is concerned, you mentioned how, you know, your uncle, for example,
[Amit Varma]: slapped you once when you did those the dialogues of Maharani and when did they start getting a
[Guest]: sense of it? And how did they react?
[Guest]: So I think after that incident, I stopped doing a lot of things. And I've also mentioned in the
[Guest]: book that growing up in a household of women, for the longest time, I was a part of the kitchen,
[Guest]: I would go and sit over there. And like I mentioned, listen to songs on the radio with them
[Guest]: and be a part of them, see how they were cooking, how they were cutting, what was going on in that
[Guest]: world, how they would gossip. And it was very interesting. I loved just growing up in the
[Amit Varma]: kitchen. In fact, I'll quote the passage from there, because I kind of liked it. So I,
[Amit Varma]: I have the book open to that page. Now, before you mentioned the kitchen,
[Amit Varma]: start quote, I think from there, I learned the art of being the other gender,
[Amit Varma]: I learned of grace of the subtleties of not expressing everything harshly, or not confining
[Amit Varma]: oneself to what the world expects of you because you happen to be a man. The songs that would be
[Amit Varma]: played on the tape recorder in the kitchen would be only by women singers. There was no intrusion
[Amit Varma]: of male voices in that domain. I was a part of that world till I was about 11 or 12. As soon as
[Amit Varma]: I turned 13, I knew I wasn't welcome in that space, stop quote. And that's obviously because you're
[Guest]: deepening of your voice. Yeah, deepening of my voice, also the fact that they understood
[Guest]: that now he's a teenage boy, his body is growing in ways that they couldn't fathom,
[Guest]: or they didn't want to, because there's always this distinction in a household. Okay, these are
[Guest]: the men and you roam with the men when you become a sort of a man. And these are the women and you
[Guest]: go with and the girls are supposed to become women, when perhaps they have their first period
[Guest]: or they experience life from there on in the next stage, and so on and so forth. So those very, very
[Guest]: silly boxing of roles is what took place. And then I just kept quiet. I was like, you know,
[Guest]: okay, this is what it is. And this is how it will be. Like, you know, even when we used to go to
[Guest]: watch movies together, the boys and the men would sit separately, the women and the girls would sit
[Guest]: separately. Yeah, except for of course, just exchanging, okay, what do you want in the
[Guest]: interview? Shall we get popcorn and so on and so forth. Otherwise, opinions and thoughts weren't
[Guest]: shared or expressed. So I think that was a big, it was a big lack over there when growing up
[Guest]: of expression. So I think, when I started expressing myself, out of anger, it was so
[Guest]: different, because nobody expected that out of me. Everybody thought I was this sort of
[Guest]: adarsh balak, I would do as told. And they had sort of charted a road map for me that he would
[Guest]: do this, he would become this and he would have a girlfriend and you'd get him married and so on and
[Amit Varma]: and so forth. But that never happened. And did this experience also sort of open your eyes to
[Amit Varma]: the cruelty of men, so to say, in a way that would not otherwise have happened if you weren't gay?
[Amit Varma]: Like, I think a lot of men like I'm talking not about sort of being straight or being gay here,
[Amit Varma]: but just in the terms of gender, the cruelty of men is something that is ubiquitous and normalized
[Amit Varma]: and taken for granted in the way that they treat their women. And just this your sense of identifying
[Amit Varma]: with the women more of, you know, not understanding why this distinction and why these different roles
[Amit Varma]: did that open? I mean, did you also then sense that ubiquitous cruelty of men?
[Guest]: Oh, yeah. From the word go, I mean, men generally that I was surrounded by,
[Guest]: I expected a certain sort of decorum, so to say, walk this way, you know, chest out,
[Guest]: shoulders up. Why are you drooping? Why this? Why that? You know, why do you want to wear this?
[Guest]: Why do you want to talk like this? Deepen your voice and you know, let it be a little gruff
[Guest]: and abuses, abuses were flying in my house like no one's business. And that's when I realized that,
[Guest]: you know, for all the books that I read and for everything, I just couldn't communicate anything
[Guest]: with them because they wouldn't get it. They just wouldn't understand. Like, I couldn't discuss an
[Guest]: Agatha Christie book, I couldn't discuss Marquez with them. Because in my head, I was way above all
[Guest]: of this. So in a very flighty sense, also, I was like, these people are just beneath me to discuss
[Amit Varma]: anything with them, or they won't understand. But did they also read? No, no. And an unrelated
[Amit Varma]: question before we get back to the family is that, would you feel that people who read more are also
[Guest]: more empathetic? Not necessarily, not all the time, but most of the time. Yes. I think people
[Guest]: who read more, I think people who read diversely are more empathetic. People who, like my uncle
[Guest]: only at some point, he read, but he would only read Alasdair Maclean. I don't know what kind of
[Guest]: empathy you can get by reading an Alasdair Maclean novel, or a James Hadley Chase novel. But yeah,
[Guest]: that's what he read. But maybe I guess if you read literature, you'd be... Perhaps,
[Guest]: I don't want to sound like a literature snob, but yes, why not? We are sounding immensely,
[Guest]: immensely snobbish. But I think it's fine. It's okay. Because I don't expect them to get it.
[Guest]: But I think just the idea of not only being gay, but just the fluidity of life, I don't think
[Guest]: they would, they would get it. It would take a lot of years, and which it has. Which it has. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about the experience of coming out to your family. Like, how was that? I mean,
[Guest]: I know it happened in steps. Yeah. I mean, I told my cousin, and she went and blurted it.
[Guest]: She blurted it? Yeah, to someone in the family. And then I just got all of them together one fine
[Guest]: day. Everyone. And I just said, Hey, Well, not your parents. My mom, my dad wasn't there around
[Guest]: at that time. He had gone somewhere and they didn't tell him. Because he had a cardiac problem,
[Guest]: and they didn't want to shock him, so to say. So I don't know what sort of shock it would be that
[Guest]: would lead to his death. But but apparently, he knew that's what my mother told me later.
[Guest]: Yeah. So and when they and when I came out to them, the first thing was, let's go,
[Guest]: now let's take him to a psychiatrist. And then she showed me some Rorschach paintings,
[Guest]: and she said, Oh, determine whether he's gay or straight. And I'm like, how can you determine
[Guest]: that? I'm telling you what I like. I'm telling you who I am. And then she's like, Oh, there's a hint
[Guest]: of gay. Hint of gay, it's not a color, you know, it's not a hint of purple or hint of orange.
[Amit Varma]: She's only a little pregnant. Yeah, you can't. How do you how do you define that? And,
[Guest]: and then she's like, I can, I can be solved with medication. I'm like your Baba Ramdev,
[Amit Varma]: before Baba Ramdev was Baba Ramdev. Did they try to give you medication? Yeah. Did you take it?
[Guest]: No. I'm like, this is not going to help anyone. You're fighting a lost cause. I mean,
[Guest]: I know exactly who I am. And, and that made it even more sure, made me even more sure.
[Amit Varma]: Now that there was any doubt. But by this time that yearning to be straight had completely gone.
[Guest]: Now, I just wanted to experience sex. Now, the next level of growing up was just to have
[Guest]: unbashful sex, just go for it. I mean, and that was very difficult for me initially,
[Guest]: to engage in that act. Because it just felt very dirty. It, I don't, I never think of it as
[Guest]: as a very enriching or spiritual experience. I don't know what is so spiritual about sex,
[Guest]: or having sex, I think it's just very messy. And so that I think this has been instilled,
[Guest]: because of a certain idea of having early sex when you when you're growing up at 17.
[Guest]: And then you wonder that, oh, my God, I can't deal with this.
[Guest]: Hmm. And that's, that's a, that's a, again, a very contradictory statement only because
[Guest]: primarily in our country, gay people are identified by the amount of sex they have,
[Guest]: they're meant to be really promiscuous and, and, you know, like sort of
[Guest]: fawning and falling all over men. And that's when the homophobia steps in.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, I've known homophobic men who almost behave as if being in contact with a gay person
[Amit Varma]: will mean, you know, the gay guy will try to rape them or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And you also mentioned that you've been asked in your book about, you know, how,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how did you become gay?
[Guest]: I woke up and I'm like, no, the transformation is the key to life. Let's do this.
[Guest]: It's a ridiculous question. Till date, I get asked, how was your first time? I'm like,
[Guest]: well, why do you need to know? I mean, now I can just tell them read the book.
[Guest]: But yeah, I'm like, buy karo, just buy the book.
[Amit Varma]: And how did your family react when you had this gathering and you told them?
[Guest]: First, it was just denial. My mother was like, oh, but you always love Sridevi,
[Unknown]: you want to marry her and this and that. I'm like, get the hint mom, I always love Sridevi.
[Guest]: She was one of the and she still is the biggest gay icon there is in the country.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I didn't know this. You don't tell her in your book. Why?
[Guest]: I don't know. I think it's just her zest for life, to put it very, for lack of a better word or
[Guest]: phrase. So infectious. So this voracious appetite to be who she wants to be on screen.
[Guest]: To express herself without fear.
[Guest]: And very, I think there's this entire, how do I put it like when you watch Chalbaaz and you
[Guest]: watch her dancing in the rain and you watch Lamhe and you see her falling for a much older man.
[Guest]: And you watch Chandni and you want her to succeed in whatever she does in her life
[Guest]: after breaking from a lover. I think it's just very empowering.
[Guest]: Yeah, and I also know that it has a lot of toxicity attached to it in the movie.
[Guest]: But just to remove her character and to see how the character is, she was a hero in Chalbaaz.
[Guest]: Sunny Deol and Rajnikanth were not needed.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And it was just lovely to watch her and watch her being so empowered.
[Guest]: I think it's also the minority connect. When a gay man and women meet,
[Guest]: when gay men and women meet, it's a minority connect. You understand the pain of being the
[Guest]: other. You understand the feeling of being alienated. So I think there that's when you
[Guest]: connect. And people then terms silly terms like fag hag, which I hate. And
[Guest]: What does it mean?
[Guest]: It means a faggot hag, that you are a fags hag.
[Guest]: Oh, okay.
[Guest]: You are like their beard or you are like, or you, or you're the confidante and you're all of that.
[Guest]: And, and, you know, they will stick to you when you will stick to them.
[Guest]: But I think it's just nothing. It's beautiful. It's a friend.
[Unknown]: And I think that's where the connect comes.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I guess, because, you know, they also perhaps sense that other dichotomy that you've
[Amit Varma]: mentioned between, say, lust and love. For example, in your book, you've written at one
[Amit Varma]: point, quote, I would wonder if two men could really fall in love. Was it about lust or was
[Amit Varma]: there more to it? Stop quote. And a little later, you write, after your first experience, you write
[Amit Varma]: quote, so that was my first time and I was too young to realize how overrated sex was and still
[Amit Varma]: sex was and still is. What surprised me was the sadness of sex that would follow with many other
[Amit Varma]: one night stands. Stop quote. And as you also mentioned earlier, a lot of the sex is very
[Amit Varma]: transactional. How does that play with you, especially because you've sort of, you're
[Amit Varma]: exposed to popular cultures such as Bollywood with this fantastical visions of romance and
[Amit Varma]: live happily forever after and eternal love and so on. How does one navigate that?
[Guest]: See, you know, so it was so funny, because I remember after so many encounters, I watched
[Guest]: Dil Toh Pagal Hai when it came out and Dil Toh Pagal Hai just made me believe, oh, there's
[Guest]: everyone, someone for everyone, which is again, I don't know if I still believe in it or not. I do,
[Guest]: but in a very strange way. But, you know, yeah, I mean, transactional to such an extent,
[Guest]: when you're chatting with someone online, it is all about likes, question mark, place,
[Guest]: question mark. There's nothing about meeting or having a conversation, or sitting and getting to
[Guest]: know each other. I think they're just scared that if we get to know each other, there'll be no room
[Guest]: for sex. You're instantly friend zoned. So they don't want that to happen. You can be friend
[Guest]: zoned after the sex, because it's okay, now we can be friends. Maybe it'll happen again,
[Guest]: or maybe not. So I think that, in that sense, the promiscuity is valid. When people say that
[Guest]: we are promiscuous, I take it with a pinch of salt, because perhaps there's some truth to it.
[Amit Varma]: And what's wrong with it?
[Guest]: No, there's nothing wrong with it. I don't mean it as something wrong with it. But I think...
[Guest]: But people do.
[Guest]: But people have known of gay men who don't like to be called promiscuous. But I don't
[Guest]: have a problem with that at all. But I think it's just that, like I said, right, when two men meet,
[Guest]: and there's sort of a very easy initiation into having sex. You just ask each other,
[Guest]: and you get it done and over with. And that's about it. There's no room for getting to know
[Guest]: each other, most of the time. Sometimes, yes, if you're lucky, the person will stay after sex and
[Guest]: will have a conversation with you. But most of the time, there's no chance of that.
[Amit Varma]: And not to push a stereotype, but would it also be the case that women, that men are generally,
[Amit Varma]: men are more often looking for just sex and women want something more. So a lot of that,
[Amit Varma]: the courtship between a straight man and a straight woman is really a sort of, it's this
[Amit Varma]: dance. It's also, and it's also transactional. But with this whole veneer of what culturally
[Amit Varma]: you're supposed to do, take someone out for a movie or blah, blah, or even put a ring on the
[Amit Varma]: finger. Yeah. And with gay men, there's no need for that pretense. You know what you want you.
[Guest]: It's Yeah. And in a way, that's very sad. Because sad in the literal sense of sad,
[Guest]: that you're overwhelmed, that you're only that the person only wants you for your perhaps,
[Guest]: for the time your body can serve a need. Yeah. You know, to put it as transparent and to put
[Guest]: it as crudely, and to put it as crudely and crudely at the same time. And in fact, people
[Guest]: write in their profiles, no chubs, no aged men, no oldies. What are chubs? Fat people, no fatties,
[Guest]: they actually say all that. In a Grindr profile, you can actually read this. And then you begin to
[Guest]: then you begin to wonder that do I even really want to meet this person, no matter how good
[Guest]: looking he is, or no matter, there's no charm, anyway, there's zero charm, then it's just very,
[Guest]: very transactional. And of course, as any other human being, you have desires, you have that
[Guest]: the need to have sex. And so you give in sometimes to all of this. And then people are also not very
[Guest]: kind in reciprocating what they take from you, in terms of giving to you, or in and out of bed,
[Guest]: they will not. Like I know so many men who say I'm not going to kiss. I'm like, oh, you're not Julia
[Guest]: Roberts from Pretty Woman. So you know, for me, no kissing is a deal breaker. It just doesn't and
[Guest]: I don't take it forward, to be so honest. So I think the boundaries or the dynamics even of sex,
[Guest]: or when it's a transaction, they need to be seeped in a little bit of personal getting to
[Guest]: know each other, or some intimacy beyond the bedroom, which I would like, but it doesn't
[Guest]: happen. And there's a need to have sex, then I give in like, okay, let's just have sex and get
[Amit Varma]: done with this, if that's what you want. Why pretend? And before we move on, you know, since
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned Sridevi, you also said something to me before the recording, which is not in your book,
[Amit Varma]: which is that there are two kinds of gay men, those who like Sridevi, and those who like Madhuri
[Guest]: Dixit. Kindly explain. No, I think if gay men are hearing this, they know exactly what I'm talking
[Amit Varma]: about. Yeah, but I don't. Enlighten, enlighten your ignorant. No, no, no, I think I think it's,
[Guest]: I don't know, I don't know if it is about the position in bed, as some people claim for it to
[Guest]: be. Tops and bottom. Yeah, yeah. So they're like, oh, if you like Sridevi, you're a bottom.
[Guest]: Oh, if you like Madhuri, you're a top. That's interesting. No, no, I've heard this a lot of
[Guest]: times. I don't think there's any truth to it. Honestly, I think it's just stupid. But I just
[Guest]: meant it in a in a lighter vein, that there are always these scams of Sridevi lovers and Madhuri
[Guest]: lovers. And I know exactly where I fall. So there you go. And, you know, going back to the subject,
[Amit Varma]: we touched on right at the start of your episode that, yeah, you're, you know, you're a gay person,
[Amit Varma]: growing up in India in these times. And obviously, it's not easy. But at the same time, you're from a
[Amit Varma]: position of, you know, you're in a family of extreme privilege. And even if your family
[Amit Varma]: isn't liberal enough to immediately be welcoming the matter with open arms, they are still liberal
[Amit Varma]: enough that you are not sort of cast out. And, you know, you're still part of the family. And
[Amit Varma]: the just the privilege and all of that makes it far easier for you to kind of cope with it,
[Guest]: isn't it? No, I wouldn't put it that way. The only reason, yeah, privilege, sure. Living in
[Guest]: South Bombay, sure, while growing up and all of that. But there were times when my aunt is like,
[Guest]: oh, in a very dramatic way. Oh, I wish I'd never known you. Oh, we should never been born in this
[Guest]: family. So all of that drama happened. And your aunt also once wished that you were lesbian.
[Guest]: Yeah, one of the other aunts who didn't realize the difference between being gay and lesbian.
[Guest]: It's like, oh, it'd be so nice if you're a lesbian. What will two girls do with each other?
[Guest]: And I'm like, okay, you don't know what they can do with each other. So let's not go there.
[Guest]: So I think it's just, I think time helps. And time heals like for a long, when I came out to
[Guest]: my mother, my mother like, oh, my upbringing is so wrong. And I'm like, what is wrong with your
[Guest]: upbringing? You did what you did. And I'm doing what I'm doing as a consequence of who I am.
[Guest]: I mean, I mean, you know, oh, but you can definitely try being straight.
[Guest]: And I couldn't even try being straight. Why don't you try being gay? You know, and see whether you
[Guest]: can fall for another woman and have sex with a woman. You also try now. If you're telling me to
[Guest]: try, you also try. You actually said this to her? I did. Okay. And she was flabbergasted. She didn't
[Guest]: know how to react. So she just reacted the way mothers would anger. So and even I just banged
[Guest]: my bedroom door. And I didn't want to engage in any conversation. And all of this, my dad never
[Guest]: spoke to me about this. So I don't know that it was so close to the idea of even approaching and
[Guest]: talking to me. So it was very strange thing that was going on in the household. Where people were
[Guest]: like, how do we treat this? How do we look at him? Is he still the same person? Would he get up in
[Guest]: the morning and be the same Vivek that we know him to be? Or Vicky, so to say? But, but yeah,
[Amit Varma]: I think things changed. Things did change. Because I guess there is that dissonance,
[Amit Varma]: where they have a mental image of you, the son, and then suddenly that mental image is completely
[Amit Varma]: shattered, because you're not now going to get married and have a family and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like, okay, so I mean, that I guess it takes and it took your mother a long time to deal
[Guest]: with that. Oh, yeah, a lot. In fact, when she read the book, I don't know, she loved the book,
[Guest]: but I was very hesitant to give her the book to read. Because there are a couple of encounters
[Guest]: with men that I mentioned and spoken about in the book, which I didn't want her to read about,
[Amit Varma]: but she has now rather delicately, there's not much that is there's nothing that is graphic in
[Guest]: the book. Yeah, thank God for that. Because maybe I shouldn't have said that I'm reducing the sales.
[Guest]: No, no, no. I don't think I don't think they care. There's too much. There's too much of gay
[Guest]: porn out there. If they want something graphic. If you don't want something graphic, go read the
[Amit Varma]: book. In fact, you mentioned something that again, struck a chord with me and reveals our
[Amit Varma]: respective ages where you, you know, wrote in your book about how you used to serve gay porn back in
[Amit Varma]: the day through a dial up connection. So just when you were about to sort of reach a pleasurable
[Guest]: climax, your you know, your mother would pick up the phone somewhere else and boom, it's all over.
[Guest]: I don't have it in me to dial up now. So I'm going to let it be. But those fun times you would know
[Guest]: how to hack passwords, and friends would share passwords over the phone. And you would just use
[Guest]: those and start and surf the internet. It was crazy when there was just one site called gay.com
[Guest]: for the Indian gay boy to go online and interact with strangers. Scary, but good fun.
[Amit Varma]: And your book, in a sense, is a coming of age story where you know, you're young,
[Amit Varma]: you discover that you're different from other people, and you're alarmed and scared by it,
[Amit Varma]: but then you come to terms with it. And then by the end of the book, we're in a happy place, you've
[Amit Varma]: kind of found what you call a family of choice. And you're in a nice place. And obviously,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of time has passed since then also to to now where you are, you know, how different is
[Guest]: the world today? I think the difference is that people are conversing. The fact that you and I
[Guest]: are sitting in a studio and talking about it, which wouldn't have happened as far as 10 years
[Guest]: ago, in 2009, or 2008, this would have been unheard of. Or even Naveen's podcast, in fact.
[Guest]: Exactly. And all for the fact that he's out there doing stand up. Yeah, you have queer stand up
[Guest]: comedians you have. So you're owning spaces, which I think is so important. You're making
[Guest]: conversations happen. You are talking about it on Twitter, on Facebook, on every social media
[Guest]: platform, which would have never happened earlier. Earlier, there was this one magazine called
[Guest]: Bombay Dose, which nobody even looked at. As a gay man, I didn't know it was available. Till about
[Guest]: recently, somebody told me about it. It was that exclusive, so to say, or, or not sold that widely
[Amit Varma]: because of the fear. You might be from South Bombay, but you weren't exclusive enough. Yeah.
[Guest]: So there you go. But which was so funny, right? That today, I'm so glad that today, people can
[Guest]: reach out to each other, their support groups in whatever form and manner, the individuals who've
[Guest]: come out as solid sort of spokespeople of the LGBT, QA plus community. I think it's so important.
[Guest]: There's GACI, there is a lot of other organizations that talk about it that are there to help
[Guest]: teenagers or young people navigate through the process. It's not that difficult. I mean,
[Guest]: today, people come out in college, and you know that there are support groups.
[Guest]: I would have loved to come out in today's time.
[Amit Varma]: And also, so much of popular culture has also changed. I mean, just the fact that
[Amit Varma]: like two of my favorite films of the last few years are Moonlight and Call Me By Your Name.
[Amit Varma]: And in both of them, you know, straight people can look at these very moving love stories and
[Amit Varma]: feel moved by them themselves, because and it doesn't matter that these are gay people who are
[Amit Varma]: the protagonists. And that's amazing. And do you think that's happening in Bollywood also,
[Guest]: to some extent with like Kapoor and Sons and Made in Heaven?
[Guest]: Made in Heaven. Now there's another movie whose teaser just got released, Shubh Mangal Zyada
[Guest]: Saavdhan with Ayushman Khurrana. He's playing a queer character, which I think is fantastic. I
[Guest]: mean, he's, he's a guy who takes risks with his role that I love the confidence he has to be able
[Guest]: to do this. For me, it is so, so endearing to see that on it'll be so it'll be a lovely experience
[Guest]: to see it on big screen, without it being reduced to a caricature, or a matter of ridicule. And then
[Guest]: not to be ashamed of it, but to take pride in the fact that this movie exists, I hope so.
[Guest]: I hope that when it releases, that's the sentiment. And that's the idea, because
[Guest]: it's so important to have such conversations. And not, you know, it being reduced to just a
[Amit Varma]: caricature. And sort of a final question about something from your book before we move on.
[Amit Varma]: I'll quote another bit from your book. Quote, that's another thing that I get irritated about
[Amit Varma]: when people introduce me to others as their gay friend. Why can't I just be a person first and a
[Amit Varma]: gay man later? There's definitely more to me than just being gay. Some women always need that one
[Amit Varma]: token gay friend who they air kiss and call darling and sweetie and think other personal
[Amit Varma]: shoppers or something, which isn't the case. Stop quote. Is this still a problem that you
[Amit Varma]: faced it? You know, people say, oh, Vivek Tejuja that gay guy. I mean, is that?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think I think it comes from a place of an identification, which is okay. It's an identity.
[Guest]: And that's fair. I wear it on my sleeve and that and I make no bones about it online or offline.
[Guest]: But it'd be nice to, to not be known by orientation. Like we don't go around introducing
[Guest]: straight people. He's a straight friend. Exactly. He's a straight man or he's a straight friend.
[Guest]: We don't do that, right? I've never done it. So why should that be stuck to me just because
[Guest]: the orientation is different, just because a particular need is different, which is only
[Guest]: limited to the bedroom. So I don't think I don't think there's anything else that's different.
[Guest]: We are still the same people.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, for like much of the time that I've known you online, I didn't even know you were gay. I
[Guest]: just knew you as a guy who really loves books. Thank God for that. We have good conversations
[Guest]: about it. And it wouldn't have made a difference even if I didn't. And it shouldn't, right? I mean,
[Guest]: yeah. So like, like, it does to like, I keep getting DMS from women who are like, Oh, I didn't
[Guest]: know you were gay. But this is so nice. Now that I know our relationship will be different. I'm like,
[Amit Varma]: how will it be different? Maybe it's different for them, because they can, they can be less
[Guest]: threatened by you. I could still be a toxic gay man. Like when people, people used to stay back
[Guest]: in the past that you know, that oh, you can go with Vivek or you can go with anyone who's gay,
[Guest]: you'll be safe with them. Oh, I may not rape you, but I can be a serial killer. You know,
[Guest]: I don't understand this concept of safety with a gay man. I get enraged. I'm like, why are you
[Guest]: doing this? How is it any different? I can, I can still strangle, I can still be hurtful.
[Guest]: I can still ensure that I drop you in the middle of the road and go my way. So what makes
[Amit Varma]: you think that you are safe? I think I think these hints at this darker serial killing side
[Amit Varma]: of yours are suddenly making it much more interesting to me. But what we are we're
[Amit Varma]: going to go in for a break now. And when we come out of the break, we are going to talk about
[Amit Varma]: our mutual love, which is books and literature. And we're just going to have a lot of fun talking
[Amit Varma]: about books we love and reading our poems we like. So that's what is waiting for you after
[Amit Varma]: the break. You've been warned don't complain later and do come back. Hey, everybody, welcome to another
[Unknown]: awesome week on the IBM podcast network. If you are not following us on social media, please make
[Unknown]: sure you do we're IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. I have a announcement for all of
[Unknown]: you at least you know, the couple of dozen of you who are listening to us on SoundCloud come the end
[Unknown]: of October, early November, we're going to be discontinuing that channel, we're not really going
[Unknown]: to be making our content available on SoundCloud anymore. So if you are listening on SoundCloud,
[Unknown]: you can have a number of options. I'd say the best option is downloading the IBM podcast app.
[Unknown]: But if not, you can download another podcasting app and you'll be able to find our content over
[Unknown]: there. We have a couple of new shows launching this week. Let me tell you about those. The first
[Unknown]: is called boundless. This is hosted by Natasha Malpani-Oswald. She reads her poems on mental
[Unknown]: health, relationships, family, marriage and many other topics and narrates personal anecdotes
[Unknown]: around these poems. Tune in to new episodes every Monday and Wednesday starting from 7th October.
[Unknown]: Postcards from Nowhere is hosted by Utsav Mamoria. It's a travel podcast where Utsav talks
[Unknown]: about his journeys to obscure and fascinating places around the world. He explores the culture,
[Unknown]: history and people from these places in the form of stories and gives you tips and tricks
[Unknown]: on solo travel. Tune in to new episodes every Thursday starting from the 10th of October.
[Unknown]: Here's what else you got on the IBM podcast network this week. On Cyrus Says,
[Unknown]: Cyrus is joined by Tej Brar, founder and managing director of 3rd Culture Entertainment.
[Unknown]: He tells Cyrus the stories behind his tattoos, talks about the upcoming Neon East Festival,
[Unknown]: and living in different places around the world from Boston to DC to Delhi.
[Unknown]: The 150th episode of Simplified is finally here. You sent in your questions and topic suggestions,
[Unknown]: now listen to Chuck, Naren and Shriketh tackle them.
[Unknown]: On The Habit Coach, Ashton is joined by Shimi Nadraja and Jessica Gabrelli from Power and
[Unknown]: Posture. They talk about the importance of arm balancing and how handstands can improve posture
[Unknown]: and build up core strength. On Tech Careers in the New, Shiladitya is joined by Jayant
[Unknown]: Swamy and Namrata Maheshwari, chief data architect and senior architect at Accenture,
[Unknown]: to talk in detail about data points. On Gol Gappa, Tripti is in conversation
[Unknown]: with actress Sayali Phatak. They talk about her experience in theater, acting as well as dancing.
[Unknown]: On Paperback, Racheta and Satyajit talk to Nirbhay Kanoria, the co-founder of online
[Unknown]: literary magazine The Curious Reader. He lists his favorite non-fiction books and
[Unknown]: the trends of reading on digital platforms. On Kinetic Living, Coach Urmi shares a surprise
[Unknown]: workout on Tabata Tuesdays and on Thriving Thursday, she shares a story that made her
[Unknown]: realize just how fragile life is. On Football, Football, Gaurav, Karthik
[Unknown]: and Siva round up the Premier League weekend and talk about the absolute demolition Bayern
[Unknown]: Munich inflicted upon Tottenham. On Puliyabazi, Pranay and Saurabh are
[Unknown]: joined by Pratik Sinha, editor and co-founder of Alt News. They discuss the anatomy of fake
[Amit Varma]: news and its prevalence in today's time. And with that, let's get you on with your shows.
[Amit Varma]: Because when I was growing up, I was surrounded by books. My father had thousands of books.
[Amit Varma]: And one day at about the age of 10, he had this, I was just looking at a shelf for something
[Amit Varma]: exciting to read. Up till that point, I had only read, you know, normal things that children of
[Amit Varma]: that age read. And I came across a book with a very intriguing title, House of the Dead.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, no, House of the Dead is Dostoevsky. Okay, sorry.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so I thought House of the Dead sounds really exciting. There'll be some adventure
[Amit Varma]: in it. And I picked it out. And it was an account of Dostoevsky's time in a Siberian prison.
[Amit Varma]: And I was so hooked that I read all of that. And then I read all of Dostoevsky. And then I,
[Amit Varma]: for some strange reason, skip to Shakespeare and read all of Shakespeare at age 10. I read
[Amit Varma]: much more at that age than regrettably I do now. But tell me more about yourself. And in
[Amit Varma]: your case is also sort of the added angle that for you, it was also a refuge.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, yeah, completely. Like, I remember, I first discovered classics
[Guest]: through Wuthering Heights. And there was a pocket classic with pictures. And I was like, okay,
[Guest]: I was about 10, 11. I was like, I was intrigued. I was like, let me just pick this up. It was very,
[Guest]: it was a big book. And at that time, I didn't know about the concept of unabridged and abridged.
[Guest]: So I picked it up, and I fell in love with it. It was written very simply,
[Guest]: because it was, of course, abridged. And I absolutely loved it. I didn't even realize
[Guest]: it was set in old England and the Moors and everything. I just love the idea of love in that.
[Guest]: I maybe didn't even realize that it had the ghost element and so much had happened and this and that,
[Guest]: but just that. I think that there on I started. So then Pride and Prejudice happened.
[Amit Varma]: And this time, I guess in the unabridged.
[Guest]: Unabridged. Yes. And for all its flaws, I love Pride and Prejudice. I love Darcy.
[Guest]: So that was another thing. And when college happened, I think around the same time, my
[Guest]: exposure to Hollywood, so to say, was with the bodyguard, Kevin Costner and Whitney Houston.
[Guest]: And I loved Kevin Costner, absolutely charmed by that man. And from there on,
[Guest]: again, it led to some more literature of a very different kind. Then I started reading a book
[Guest]: called The English Patient, which I love to date. Like what a book, what a book. And that time,
[Guest]: Booker, I think I came to know of the Booker because Arundhati Roy won it in 1997,
[Amit Varma]: when I was 14. An English patient won it the year before. Yes, 1996 or 1995. And that's how I got to
[Guest]: know of the existence of the English patient. And then I watched the movie. I insisted that my mother
[Guest]: take me to watch the film. And I fell in love with the movie. And it's one of those very interesting
[Guest]: instances where the film is also remarkably good. Yes. Which doesn't happen all the time.
[Guest]: And from there on, from the movie and from the book, I wanted to read Hereditus, because that
[Guest]: book was mentioned so many times in the movie and the book, The English Patient, you just had to
[Guest]: read. So you know, I love book references in books. I love that when there's a reading list
[Guest]: that comes out of a book. When that happens, so that you already have that reading list.
[Amit Varma]: When I read nonfiction, something I keep doing is I just go to the back very often, I go to the foot
[Amit Varma]: notes or the end notes very often. So inevitably, if I read a good book, I'll end up reading five
[Guest]: other books that I picked up because of the end notes. Yeah. Happens to you? Oh, yeah, yeah,
[Guest]: completely. And when it's fiction, I love when when a character is talking about a book, like
[Guest]: I just finished reading a book by Ann Patchett, the new one called The Dutch House. And in that
[Guest]: she's mentioning the Makioka Sisters by Tanezaki. And I love that book. So I'm like, I smile to
[Guest]: myself and I'm like, hey, there's a camaraderie of sorts between me and the author. You share
[Guest]: that secret. Yeah, you share that secret book. Or you know that, you know, she also loves it.
[Guest]: So I think that that is very, very uplifting in the world of books and reading. And when you start
[Guest]: doing when you when you look out for these red herrings, and you look out for these clues,
[Guest]: whether it's a sentence or a reference in a TV show, when people talk about books,
[Guest]: I love that. Like Lost, one of my favorite TV series had so many books mentioned in it.
[Guest]: So yeah, it just it's just lovely to see that.
[Amit Varma]: And your mother also read you mentioned?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, a lot. A lot.
[Amit Varma]: So you had books at home?
[Guest]: I had books at home, I had access to them. And my parents, we had a membership library,
[Guest]: family membership to British Council. So every weekend, or every week after college,
[Guest]: I would go to British Library and borrow books. There was I, Claudius, and Claudius the God,
[Guest]: and Claudius the God, which also had a BBC television series.
[Amit Varma]: I've seen the I, Claudius BBC television series.
[Guest]: Yes, it is intense. Oh, yeah, yeah. You know, his grandmother in that show,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if you remember, she was so good. But what a character and then what,
[Guest]: what a book by Robert Graves. I mean, to think that historical fiction was written
[Guest]: way back. And of course, in a very, very...
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I never actually read that particular book, I just saw the series. But, you know,
[Amit Varma]: while we are on that, and we mentioned the English patient, to take a brief digression,
[Amit Varma]: what are the instances where you have loved both the book and the movie?
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's a very difficult question.
[Amit Varma]: Like my standard answer to that while you think about yours is James Joyce's The Dead,
[Guest]: which was made into a film by John Huston.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not, I'm not watched the film.
[Amit Varma]: It's a lovely film. And remarkably, it's not on your Netflix, Prime and all that it the full
[Amit Varma]: thing is on YouTube. In a slightly bad print, as they would say.
[Unknown]: I'll watch it for sure.
[Amit Varma]: Back in the old days, and I put up a tweet thread on it as well at one point.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to look at the show notes. And that was memorably lovely, especially because
[Amit Varma]: like there is one scene in it, which I love where you've read the story, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So there's one scene where they're leaving the party and
[Amit Varma]: the male protagonist is at the bottom of the stairs and his wife is coming down. And at one
[Amit Varma]: point, someone starts singing this song called The Last of Ogrim. And you cut into her face,
[Amit Varma]: and she has just stopped and he is staring at her riveted. And she is lost in another world.
[Amit Varma]: And you see that sadness and longing in her face. And she's looking down and Angelica Huston
[Amit Varma]: just acts beautifully there. And the inside story of that also of that particular scene
[Amit Varma]: is that this film was John Huston's last film, her father, Angelica's father,
[Amit Varma]: he was dying, he died before the film was released, but after it was made.
[Amit Varma]: So when she looked down from the stairs, she saw him on a wheelchair with oxygen pipes.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, that's why the sadness.
[Amit Varma]: And that's where the sadness came from. And it's a mind blowing scene. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: the scene itself alone is on YouTube. But that's that's one book.
[Guest]: But I must tell you, sorry to interrupt, but there's this one other story to
[Guest]: The Last of Ogrim is that James and his wife Nora used to share the song.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And they loved this song. And it was part of their song,
[Guest]: right from their marriage to their death, one of the deaths or so. So yeah, that's the story to
[Guest]: that. I mean, there's a movie called Nora, which is based on
[Guest]: Which has a beautiful scene where Susan Lynch is singing this song with
[Guest]: Even Juan McGregor.
[Guest]: Yeah, and he's playing
[Guest]: Which is beautiful. I mean, and that also I saw, courtesy British Library.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is that that incident, the Michael Fury incident was inspired by
[Amit Varma]: something which actually happened to Nora.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: There was a Michael Fury in her life.
[Guest]: And which I hadn't known till recently.
[Guest]: Yeah, because I read the biography of Nora Joyce by a lady called Brenda Wex or something
[Unknown]: to that effect. But what a biography. You must pick it up if you ever get a chance.
[Amit Varma]: Sorry, books to movies.
[Guest]: Books to movies.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, you were saying.
[Amit Varma]: You were saying I'm done. I wanted to just jog.
[Guest]: I love Gone with the Wind. I think, like I said, people may find it problematic today.
[Guest]: But going by the time it was made and how it was made. I absolutely loved it.
[Guest]: Though at that time also, it was problematic in the sense that Clark, there was another actor
[Guest]: supposed to play the role of Fred Butler, but was replaced because he was known to be a homosexual.
[Guest]: I can't remember the name of the actor. And the director just didn't want that.
[Guest]: Who was this?
[Amit Varma]: I can't remember. But there's a story you can google it.
[Amit Varma]: You can google it.
[Guest]: And how they then got Clark Gable to play Fred Butler, which was really sad.
[Guest]: Clark Gable benefiting from the homophobia of others.
[Guest]: There you go, of Hollywood. So that was that. I love The Postman Always Rings Twice by James
[Guest]: M. Cain. And I love the movie also, only because of John Garfield. Absolutely find him so stunningly
[Guest]: hot. I was like, I was just glued to Turner classic movies at one time in my life. I mentioned
[Guest]: in the book as well. And Cat on a Hot Tin Roof with Paul Newman, looking the way he did.
[Guest]: And the play by Tennessee Williams, which I again love, because Tennessee Williams,
[Guest]: this latent homosexuality in all his plays, does a wonderful job of projecting that into either his
[Guest]: women or his men, but mostly women. His angst and everything comes out through the women characters,
[Guest]: which I think is a brilliant job that he did as a playwright.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I read him when I was a teenager, like decades ago. So I've probably got to reread
[Amit Varma]: him in that light. I mean, another great translation of story to film I thought was
[Amit Varma]: Brokeback Mountain.
[Guest]: I love that.
[Amit Varma]: The story, of course, came out in, I think, 98 or 99 in New York.
[Guest]: Annie Proulx, I don't know.
[Guest]: Annie Proulx, yeah, neither do I.
[Guest]: Yeah, but what a story.
[Amit Varma]: And have you seen that film called In the Bedroom?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, In the Bedroom is based on a short story by Andre Dubu.
[Guest]: I think that's how you pronounce it. Dubu is just a glorious, glorious short story.
[Amit Varma]: And the story was called something else. I think it came in either New York or Paris
[Amit Varma]: Review or one of these. And the story basically is about these parents whose son is killed by
[Amit Varma]: someone and then they want to take revenge. Son is killed in the sense, maybe it's an accident.
[Amit Varma]: I don't even remember now. But it's a very nice short story. And it's a beautiful film.
[Amit Varma]: Classic film, one of my favorites, but they're very different from each other,
[Amit Varma]: which is also sort of very interesting on how you take a story which is much more compressed.
[Guest]: And then you just build this dramatic thing out of it.
[Guest]: Which is great because I love him as a short story writer. And I wish there were more,
[Guest]: more, you know, movies based on books in India. I've seen so many. I love Gumna
[Guest]: based on And Then There Were None. I love because it's so bad. It's so hammy that I love it.
[Guest]: Like for the longest time, when I got my tribe of gay men as friends and all of that,
[Guest]: we would play the song that Helen dances to in that movie Kitty Kelly on the beach,
[Guest]: and we would dance to it as well at a friend's house, because it was so funny,
[Guest]: the song and the way it was done. And then we used to copy steps of the song and it was very
[Guest]: interesting. So I think Indian literature has a lot. I mean, I love Devdas for all its,
[Guest]: again, such a badly made movie by Bansali. It's a horrendously bad film. It's a horrendously bad
[Guest]: film. But I just love it. I don't know why because of Madhuri and Aishwarya, I guess.
[Guest]: But I love some, I love their interaction in the film. I don't like the book at all. But yeah.
[Amit Varma]: This is a completely, by the way, diversion. But my father once used to be director of the
[Amit Varma]: Film and Television Institute of India in the late 80s. And he expelled Sanjay Leela Bansali.
[Guest]: Excellent. Good choice.
[Amit Varma]: Not for the right reasons. It was, I think, more to do with misbehavior. But I would have expelled
[Guest]: him for aesthetic reasons. You know, there's this one movie that I don't know if you watched it,
[Guest]: based on Madame Bovary by Flaubert. I really enjoyed the film. I love the book. But I enjoyed
[Guest]: the film because I thought Deepa Saini did such a good job. And it was a Doordarshan film. I think,
[Guest]: yeah. So that I really liked. And a lot of movies that time on Doordarshan that were made
[Guest]: were from books like Party, right? By Mahesh, I can't pronounce his last name.
[Unknown]: Elkunchwar.
[Unknown]: Elkunchwar, yeah. Party is Mahesh.
[Guest]: I think he wrote the play and Govind Nilani made the film.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, Govind Nilani made the film.
[Amit Varma]: By the way, I don't think I've told you this. But since you had mentioned before we recorded that
[Amit Varma]: you had liked the book I released 10 years ago. That was almost made into a film by Govind Nilani.
[Amit Varma]: In the sense, he got in touch with me and he said, I'd like to make the film. And I even worked on a
[Amit Varma]: script treatment for him, but he could never raise funding for it. At which point he said that Marathi
[Amit Varma]: film industry is like, Hindi film industry was in the early 80s, and he still couldn't get funding.
[Amit Varma]: And I was kind of flabbergasted that a guy of his stature who's made the kind of movies he has
[Guest]: is not being able to fund it. It's crazy.
[Guest]: Maybe you want to pitch it to Netflix?
[Amit Varma]: No, I don't want to pitch it at all. It was a terrible book. I don't know.
[Guest]: It wasn't, not at all, please. Now you're just fishing.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I have an interesting Mayam Aimsaab story also. So I was in college when I was
[Amit Varma]: a hostelite in Ferguson College, Pune when Mayam Aimsaab was released. And if any of my
[Amit Varma]: hostel mates are listening to this, I, after all these years, I apologize for what I did.
[Amit Varma]: So what I did was I went and watched the first day first show. And then I went back to the
[Amit Varma]: hostel and I gathered everyone around and I described in detail a number of lurid scenes,
[Amit Varma]: which were not in the film. Right. So then all of them go to watch first day third show.
[Amit Varma]: And they're disappointed.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And then they come back out saying, Amit, the censors cut it for the third show.
[Guest]: No, so I got to watch the uncensored version through a library VHS tape. And even then,
[Guest]: I mean, Shah Rukh did nothing for me, but I just liked the way the movie was,
[Guest]: except for the horrendous Raj Babbar in it. Like, why is he there in the film? But,
[Guest]: but yeah, it was a good movie. I quite enjoyed it.
[Amit Varma]: I kind of felt it was a little bit of a sort of random movie.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, very, very self indulgent, no doubt.
[Amit Varma]: Let us now take a poem break. I think both of us have got about three,
[Guest]: four poems that we are happy to talk about and read. Let's begin with you.
[Guest]: Okay, so this is one of my favorite poems, one of my favorite people, Eunice, Eunice D'Souza.
[Guest]: The poem is advice to women. And very strangely, this always reminds me of 36 Chaurangi Lane,
[Guest]: which I love. And I wish somebody would write a book out of that movie. That's
[Guest]: a movie that I want to read. One of my all time favorite films. So I think that's also got to do
[Guest]: with the idea of gay man aging, old alone, which is very scary. We'll talk about that some other
[Guest]: time. But here's a poem called advice to women. Keep cats if you want to learn to cope with the
[Guest]: otherness of lovers. Otherness is not always neglect. Cats return to their litter trays
[Guest]: when they need to. Don't cuss out of the window at their enemies. That stare of perpetual surprise
[Guest]: in those great green eyes will teach you to die alone.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely. And I love all this stuff. And it's very interesting. I mean, how do you feel about this,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, I feel very awkward reading poetry aloud or listening to spoken poetry,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, because, you know, it seems to me that I read it one way in a page.
[Amit Varma]: And then when you hear it, it's a completely different beast. Even though the sound matters
[Amit Varma]: so much. But so you know, these poetry readings just seem to me like, what?
[Guest]: I think they are very pretentious. And there are a lot of them today,
[Guest]: spoken word performances and all, which is, see, I'm not taking away from the beauty of the poem.
[Guest]: But just by being read aloud, I don't know. I think the entire drama and performance attached
[Guest]: to it. So that's something that maybe I don't know how I'll react to in person when this happens.
[Guest]: So I don't attend them anyway. But it's fun to know that there are voices, it's good to know that
[Guest]: there are so many voices that are emerging or emerge because of this practice.
[Amit Varma]: And as a sort of a book critic, do you also find expectations of what a critic must do,
[Amit Varma]: especially from the more academic sorts, that the critics have to have a particular way of
[Amit Varma]: doing their criticism? I'm not a critic.
[Guest]: But you write about books.
[Guest]: I write about books, but I don't care what people have to say. Because people say a lot of things of
[Guest]: how things should be written about or viewed or said or listened to. But I think it's okay. I mean,
[Guest]: you can't make them all happy, right? So why bother? Your poem?
[Amit Varma]: Okay, let me read out something. Have you read Mark Strand?
[Guest]: Yes. You had mentioned it online, I remember on Twitter, and I replied to you as well.
[Amit Varma]: Saying how much I love Mark Strand.
[Amit Varma]: I love Mark Strand. In particular, I like his later work. His last book of poems before he
[Amit Varma]: died was called Almost Invisible. And it's a book of prose poems. So if someone who is not into that
[Amit Varma]: stuff looks at it, they'll just see one paragraph and they'll say, how is this poem? But and even
[Amit Varma]: I can't really answer that question. Can you?
[Guest]: No, Anne Carson does a beautiful job of prose poetry. A lot of people do that.
[Guest]: A prose poetry.
[Amit Varma]: Mark Strand's book is pretty spectacular. So the first poem I'll read out is actually a prose poem.
[Amit Varma]: It's called You Can Always Get There From Here. And in a sense, you know, this poem before I read
[Amit Varma]: it out, in a sense, this is a little poignant, because it feels to me that this might be a
[Amit Varma]: direction in which we might be going in India. You know, the overall sense of it. And that's,
[Amit Varma]: but maybe that's just my take.
[Amit Varma]: You Can Always Get There From Here by Mark Strand.
[Amit Varma]: A traveler returned to the country from where he had started many years before.
[Amit Varma]: When he stepped from the boat, he noticed how different everything was.
[Amit Varma]: There were once many buildings, but now there were few and each of them needed repair.
[Amit Varma]: In the park where he played as a child,
[Amit Varma]: dust filled shafts of sunlight struck the tawny leaves of trees and withered hedges.
[Amit Varma]: Empty trash bags littered the grass. The air was heavy.
[Amit Varma]: He sat on one of the benches and explained to the woman next to him that he'd been away a long time,
[Amit Varma]: then asked her what season had he come back to.
[Amit Varma]: She replied that it was the only one left, the one they had all agreed on.
[Amit Varma]: And in this poem, I don't mean literally that India is going to look like the Soviet dystopian
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: The imagery is so powerful when you're talking about the sunlight or you're talking about
[Guest]: the leaves and the hedges and you're talking about how he steps out of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't mean this literal sense of decay or everything looks the same or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: but just a sense that this is a season that everyone has agreed upon.
[Amit Varma]: And you kind of, you know,
[Guest]: The season of loss.
[Amit Varma]: I think he might well have had the Soviet Union in mind, for example,
[Guest]: when he wrote this, which was pretty much where it was, you had a totalitarian regime
[Guest]: insisting on its own vision of the world.
[Guest]: We are not very far from it.
[Amit Varma]: But that's, well, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: Scary, but yeah, well.
[Amit Varma]: That's kind of, so do you ever get snobbery from book people that, you know, why do you like this?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, are there writers who are supposed to be cool to read and not so cool to read?
[Amit Varma]: Like you mentioned earlier in the episode that you had liked Shobhadeh's sisters.
[Amit Varma]: But that, of course, was when you were first given it.
[Unknown]: And that's not necessarily what you like today.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But is there somehow that, I mean, you know, I, for example,
[Amit Varma]: I discovered Haruki Murakami in the late 90s.
[Amit Varma]: I think when I read him in Playboy, of all things, I read Playboy for the stories.
[Guest]: Yeah, there were some fantastic stories right there.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I was a fan of Murakami from then.
[Amit Varma]: And it was kind of disconcerting that about a decade or a decade and a half ago,
[Amit Varma]: it suddenly became cool to like Murakami when the rest of the world caught on.
[Amit Varma]: And now to hate it.
[Guest]: And now to hate it.
[Guest]: Like I discovered him in 2001 with Sputnik Sweetheart.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And that was the time I lost my father.
[Guest]: So that book has always been very special.
[Guest]: You know, it's somehow, it's not the loss of my dad that would make me stop reading that book.
[Unknown]: In fact, I read it every year.
[Guest]: I love that book so much.
[Guest]: There's something maybe because it speaks of loss.
[Guest]: And it speaks of, again, love not being found.
[Guest]: So I think it just connected at a very, very deeper level.
[Guest]: But I get what you mean about authors being dissed and being loved later.
[Guest]: And then you're like, I have been reading him, you discovered him right now.
[Guest]: So you shut up kind of a thing.
[Guest]: That kind of book snobbery is there in my head.
[Guest]: I don't say it out loud.
[Guest]: But now I have said it out loud.
[Guest]: So sometimes it's there.
[Guest]: I'm like, why can't you get what the author is trying to tell you?
[Guest]: But then I also see that there are different things that people take from the same book.
[Amit Varma]: And then also you see people making that effort because it's cool to like Murakami.
[Amit Varma]: You buy Murakami and you read him and you're making the effort to like Murakami to be cool
[Amit Varma]: rather than just take joy in the book itself as the case may be.
[Guest]: I mean, the short story of his I read, in fact, was one called The Second Bakery Attack.
[Guest]: Yes, it was in The Elephant Vanishes.
[Guest]: It was in The Elephant Vanishes.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, it had come second or third story in The Elephant Vanishes, a beautiful story.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely story.
[Guest]: One of my favorite Murakami stories is in After the Quake.
[Guest]: I don't know if you've read it.
[Unknown]: I've read it but I may not remember.
[Guest]: There's a last story called, I can't remember what it's called, Honey something, Honey Bun
[Guest]: or something to that effect about a girl and her single mother and a friend who loves the
[Guest]: girl's mother and how they make this strange family unit beautifully written.
[Guest]: One of his more life-affirming stories and not so pessimistic, but a great one.
[Amit Varma]: I've got to kind of revisit that.
[Amit Varma]: Speaking of stories for a moment, like another writer I've loved for many, many years and
[Amit Varma]: we've actually discussed her.
[Amit Varma]: So I know you love her also, Alice Munro.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, oh my God.
[Amit Varma]: And she suddenly became very cool for the Hoi Poloi to said they've read her when she
[Amit Varma]: won the Nobel Prize and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But like just such an amazing.
[Guest]: I think she can never write a bad sentence.
[Guest]: It's not possible.
[Guest]: Just not possible.
[Guest]: Like anything, anything that we've read of hers.
[Guest]: I think she's just brilliant.
[Amit Varma]: And what strikes me about Alice Munro is that she does with the short story.
[Amit Varma]: I haven't seen anyone else do to this extent in the sense that in a very short space, she
[Amit Varma]: will compress such a deep, lovely novelistic world almost.
[Amit Varma]: It's like she doesn't need to write novels because she can say it all in a short story.
[Amit Varma]: And the one, my favorite short story of hers is called The Bear Came Over The Mountain.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, about amnesia.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: About this old man.
[Amit Varma]: Alzheimer's rather.
[Amit Varma]: Alzheimer's, yeah.
[Unknown]: And amnesia.
[Unknown]: Yeah, I don't know about Alzheimer's.
[Unknown]: You're correct.
[Guest]: I, but what a beautiful, beautiful story.
[Guest]: You know, talking about that, the movie is also really very good.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Based on the short story.
[Amit Varma]: I saw the movie far from her or something like that.
[Guest]: Away from her, far from her.
[Guest]: Away from her.
[Guest]: Yeah, but I kind of found it, perhaps compared to the story, because I'm just such a fan.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Amit Varma]: We will link the story from the show notes.
[Guest]: Kindly read her.
[Guest]: Yeah, you must.
[Guest]: I mean, Monroe is someone who's so close to my heart.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Because again, I think, I think when, when authors and books come to you at a time when
[Guest]: you need them the most, I think they just change the way you are as a person.
[Guest]: Was that the case with Monroe?
[Guest]: Yeah, completely.
[Guest]: She just landed in my lap just like that.
[Guest]: Like literally, I just went to Lotus bookstore.
[Guest]: And I love Joyce Carol Oates.
[Guest]: And, and I was like, okay, time to read something different.
[Guest]: And I just chanced upon this book called Hateship, Friendship, Loveship.
[Guest]: Courtship Marriage.
[Guest]: And I was like, okay, let's just pick this up.
[Guest]: And I never looked back since then.
[Guest]: I just have to read her.
[Guest]: And, and even though you've read her, you want to go back to her and read her again.
[Amit Varma]: And, and often just from the point of view as a writer, like I have gone to her stories
[Amit Varma]: trying to figure out the craft, like how the hell does she do this?
[Amit Varma]: To keep a story moving so fluidly and yet pack in so much and pack in a whole universe
[Guest]: into a story.
[Guest]: And so many emotions, she'll wring them all out of you.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Like when she writes a sentence, it's a central just keep playing in your head over and over
[Guest]: again.
[Guest]: It just won't let go.
[Amit Varma]: Just lovely.
[Amit Varma]: And if some of you are aspiring writers, it might be interesting to note that her writing
[Amit Varma]: really happened very late.
[Unknown]: She really blossomed in her 50s and 60s.
[Amit Varma]: And her best work is like now in her old age.
[Amit Varma]: I think in the last 20 years, she's just kind of been knocking it out of the park one story
[Guest]: at a time.
[Guest]: There's this other writer who I absolutely adore, this Australian writer called Christina
[Guest]: Stead.
[Guest]: Okay, I've never read her.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: There's this book called The Man Who Loved Children about how a father, you know, treats
[Guest]: his children really badly.
[Guest]: And not, not abuse in the sense, but about their family unit.
[Guest]: And it's so dysfunctional.
[Guest]: It's a brilliant book.
[Guest]: Franzen recommends it a lot.
[Guest]: Ah, okay.
[Guest]: And that's how I got to know of it.
[Guest]: And that's when I read it, way back in 2009, when I think Freedom came out, 2009, 2010.
[Guest]: And Oprah selected Freedom for her book club.
[Guest]: And then I read Freedom.
[Guest]: And I already read Corrections.
[Guest]: But I love Freedom more.
[Guest]: And then he spoke about Christina Stead.
[Guest]: And that's how I got to know of her.
[Amit Varma]: That's interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And it kind of brings on a lament about how my reading habit fell a little bit through
[Amit Varma]: many of those years.
[Amit Varma]: Like I read Corrections and absolutely loved it.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I haven't read Freedom.
[Amit Varma]: You must read Freedom.
[Guest]: You'll love it.
[Guest]: And it's a rock and roll.
[Guest]: Yeah, okay.
[Guest]: And it's got, it's got music.
[Guest]: And of course, he loves birds.
[Guest]: So there's a lot of bird watching.
[Guest]: And it's again about a dysfunctional family.
[Guest]: And I don't think anybody else that dysfunctional family better than Franzen does it.
[Amit Varma]: So the great American writers are very good at dysfunctional family.
[Guest]: Updike is all dysfunctional.
[Guest]: Yates also, which he had a very short span.
[Unknown]: Achiever does a brilliant job in short stories, again, does a brilliant job of the dysfunctionality.
[Guest]: Ford also does a very good job.
[Amit Varma]: It's right up the American.
[Guest]: Yeah, completely.
[Guest]: I think even the Indian scene, a lot of Bengali writers do that really well.
[Guest]: I know Asha Poornadevi, who I love, as a short story writer, I was just thinking about her
[Guest]: when you mentioned Monroe, because she is brilliant.
[Guest]: I wish more of her works.
[Guest]: I've never read her.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, she was the one who wrote her novels and stories without stepping foot
[Guest]: out of home.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And she was this Bengali lady, very unassuming.
[Guest]: And she wrote about close to 3000 short stories, and about 152 novels.
[Amit Varma]: 152 novels.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, all in Bengali.
[Guest]: And some of it has been translated, very few.
[Guest]: But I keep telling Arunabha on Twitter, Arunabha Sinha, that, you know, please translate more
[Guest]: of her because we need to read more of her.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and he's an outstanding translator.
[Guest]: And he also translates very prolifically, three, four books.
[Guest]: Oh, yeah, a year, I think.
[Guest]: But what a book, you must read Asha Poornadevi.
[Amit Varma]: She's so good.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, speaking of book to film, another one which struck my mind when you said Bengali
[Amit Varma]: was Days and Nights.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: I just finished rereading it last night.
[Guest]: And Robi and all these characters are still so fresh in my mind, as we speak now.
[Guest]: I love the movie.
[Guest]: Love the movie.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely love the movie.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess if you want any filmmaker to make a film of your book and therefore to be part
[Guest]: of this list, it's obviously Shottu Jitra.
[Guest]: Yeah, of course, of course.
[Guest]: Hands down.
[Guest]: Like, I can't think of anyone else.
[Guest]: And I loved how Choker Bali was done by Ritu Panna Ghosh as well.
[Guest]: Oh, I haven't seen it.
[Guest]: Yeah, I love the treatment of the film and how he got the essence of the book pat on.
[Guest]: So I think, yeah, another movie I would love to be read as a book is Doshar, again by him.
[Guest]: I don't know if you watched it.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: Konkona, Sen Sharma and Prasanjit is there.
[Amit Varma]: Brilliant, brilliant movie.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: That's something to look out for.
[Amit Varma]: Let's have your next poem.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Since we're talking about Sputnik, should I give you a quote from that?
[Guest]: Sure, please.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: And it came to me then that we were wonderful traveling companions, but in the end, no more
[Guest]: than lonely lumps of metal in their own separate orbits.
[Guest]: From far off, they look like beautiful shooting stars.
[Guest]: But in reality, they are nothing more than prisons, where each of us is locked up alone,
[Guest]: going nowhere.
[Guest]: When the orbits of these two satellites of ours happened to cross paths, we could be
[Guest]: together, maybe even open our hearts to each other.
[Guest]: But that was only for the briefest moment.
[Guest]: In the next instant, we'd be in absolute solitude, until we burned up and became nothing.
[Guest]: Lovely.
[Guest]: I think he just hits a spot.
[Guest]: And I don't expect him to in any of his books.
[Guest]: In any of his books, he just, they just come out of the pages and grabs you.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you're like, okay, I have to pay attention to what he's writing.
[Amit Varma]: Which books do you wish were made into movies?
[Guest]: No, those I don't wish.
[Guest]: Like, I'm very skeptical.
[Guest]: I love 100 Years of Solitude.
[Guest]: For example, it was very hard to make something.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but they are, right?
[Amit Varma]: They've tried.
[Guest]: Yeah, making a series.
[Guest]: I just hope somebody has understood the book to be able to make it into a series.
[Guest]: And a suitable boy, which I never wanted them to make into a series, but they are.
[Guest]: So that's something that I don't want.
[Guest]: I wish they would leave some books alone.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you're not forced to watch it.
[Amit Varma]: And you never know, sometimes they can surprise you in a good way, like with The Dead.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, who would have thought it to make the kind of film?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's true.
[Guest]: But like, you know, Bel Canto, they made by Ann Patchett, starring Julianne Moore.
[Guest]: And I haven't watched the movie because I'm scared.
[Guest]: I love the book way too much.
[Amit Varma]: The fear of the cinema hall.
[Guest]: Yeah, like I watched Midnight's Children.
[Guest]: I wanted to puke into a bucket.
[Guest]: It disappointed me so much.
[Guest]: And no, I'm not saying that for the director or the way it is, but it's a big book.
[Guest]: You cannot compress it into two and a half hours of movie.
[Guest]: You have to tell it the way the author meant it to be written.
[Amit Varma]: And to be interpreted.
[Amit Varma]: If you think about it, even with the English patient, the film made that cinematic choice
[Amit Varma]: of focusing on sort of one particular strand of the book, like the Indian characters, for
[Guest]: example, very major in the book.
[Guest]: But yes, but not there in the movie.
[Guest]: You know, one book to movie, which I absolutely love is The Namesake.
[Guest]: I absolutely love Jhumpa Lahiri's adaptation, as in Miranayar's adaptation of Jhumpa Lahiri's
[Guest]: book, which is stunning.
[Guest]: I mean, Tabu and Irrfan Khan and everybody's acted so well.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, that's again one of my favorites.
[Amit Varma]: Great writer, great director.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, a writer I discovered.
[Amit Varma]: So Jhumpa Lahiri was on this podcast called Conversations with Tyler, with Tyler Cowen.
[Amit Varma]: And in that, she mentioned she was going through this phase where she was learning a new language
[Amit Varma]: and writing in it, in her case, Italian.
[Amit Varma]: And she spoke about another author called Agatha Kristoff.
[Amit Varma]: At first, I thought it's a typo of Agatha Christie.
[Guest]: But for a moment, it seemed that way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So she spoke about an author called Agatha Kristoff, who basically, I think, moved during
[Amit Varma]: the war to France, if I'm not mistaken, learned a new language and then wrote books in that
[Amit Varma]: language from scratch.
[Amit Varma]: In her new language, which she learned in her adult life.
[Amit Varma]: It's a trilogy, I forget what it's called, but it's magnificent, very sort of bare, sparse,
[Unknown]: minimal language.
[Guest]: You've read it?
[Guest]: I've read it.
[Guest]: Yeah, obviously.
[Guest]: I think the Notebook is the first book.
[Guest]: The Notebook is the first one.
[Guest]: Yes, I remember this one now.
[Guest]: Yes, it just struck me.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Agatha Kristoff.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: It's a lovely trilogy.
[Amit Varma]: And I recommend everyone.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I have the omnibus copy with all three books.
[Guest]: I think Strand used to sell this one a lot.
[Guest]: Oh, really?
[Guest]: Strand Fort, man.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I got mine from Amazon.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, they used to sell a lot.
[Amit Varma]: And Mr. Shanbhag knew what he was doing after all.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this is...
[Guest]: He knew it right down to the pad.
[Amit Varma]: It's a lovely... and speaking of a bare, sparse language, do you sort of have specific literary
[Amit Varma]: tastes which stop you from enjoying certain writers?
[Amit Varma]: For example, in my case, I simply don't like the sort of flamboyant, over-stylized kind
[Amit Varma]: of writing that say Rushdie and Arundhati Roy do.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, so I'm much more a kind of person who'll read Vikram Seth or Amitav Ghosh or,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and all the Japanese writers, because it might be some
[Amit Varma]: intrinsic quality in their language, which lends itself to simplicity and minimalism.
[Amit Varma]: But the more flamboyant a writer gets, the harder, even if I can appreciate some of the
[Amit Varma]: flamboyance, and interestingly, Rushdie's flamboyance is only there in his fiction.
[Amit Varma]: I find his nonfiction much more readable.
[Guest]: Yeah, his nonfiction, in fact, is very interesting.
[Guest]: But I think for me, nothing of that sort, really.
[Guest]: Not really. But I think some writers I just don't veer towards, like I'll never,
[Guest]: thrillers, I can't stand them.
[Unknown]: I just don't, just the way it's written.
[Guest]: Just, and not about, I have to wait till the end to figure things out.
[Guest]: But I just can't read a thriller, no matter how hard I try.
[Guest]: Or horror, for the longest time I couldn't.
[Guest]: But King makes it palpable, so I'll read it.
[Guest]: But otherwise, I won't read horror at all.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, do you read any science fiction?
[Guest]: Um, yeah, I mean, no, not really.
[Guest]: Science fiction cloaked as fantasy, yeah, sure.
[Guest]: I'll read, I love that.
[Guest]: But not science fiction, like I can't read Asimov.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: Just cannot.
[Guest]: But I love Philip K. Dick.
[Guest]: I don't know why.
[Guest]: But, but yeah, I can't answer that.
[Guest]: But I love Philip K. Dick.
[Amit Varma]: If you read someone, like some of the newer guys aren't even, I mean, it's hard to even
[Amit Varma]: call them science fiction because they're not like how you imagine cliched, hard science
[Guest]: fiction to be.
[Guest]: People like Ken Liu, have you read him?
[Guest]: Yeah, Ken Liu, I like a lot.
[Amit Varma]: Paper Menagerie.
[Guest]: I love that collection of short stories.
[Guest]: Lovely collection.
[Guest]: Love that.
[Guest]: Or that three-body problem writer.
[Amit Varma]: Sissin Liu, I don't know how to pronounce it.
[Amit Varma]: Sissin Liu.
[Amit Varma]: I've read two books, I have to read the third one.
[Guest]: Or N.K. Jemisin, who I absolutely adore.
[Guest]: Ted Chiang.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, Ted Chiang, N.K. Jemisin.
[Amit Varma]: On whom Short Story Arrival was made.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: He's come up with a new collection, Exhalation.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, which I've got, but I haven't started.
[Amit Varma]: Neither have I, I have to read it yet.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, wait, I've read, I think the title story from it, which is very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And the good thing about a lot of these so-called science fiction writers and even a lot of the
[Amit Varma]: so-called science fiction films that come is that this quote unquote genre is going
[Amit Varma]: to places which other literature doesn't seem to be rushing into so eagerly and asking these
[Amit Varma]: big existential questions.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like even with, say, a film like Blade Runner, you know, the new Blade Runner.
[Guest]: Even Minority Report for that matter.
[Amit Varma]: Even Minority Report or, you know, there's a film called Durs Machina.
[Guest]: Yeah, I've heard of it, but I haven't watched it.
[Amit Varma]: It's made by Alex Garland.
[Amit Varma]: The guy who wrote The Beach.
[Amit Varma]: The guy who wrote The Beach and Tesseract, which I like more than The Beach.
[Guest]: Yes, Tesseract is a better novel than The Beach, yes, I agree, completely.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a very interesting film.
[Amit Varma]: So like Durs Machina will, for example, go into areas like, you know, how the moral values
[Amit Varma]: you attach to AI, should you kill an artificial being and so on.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Blade Runner looked at things like how identity is constructed or the fallibility
[Amit Varma]: of memory.
[Amit Varma]: And all of these really big questions are questions that I think science fiction is
[Amit Varma]: ideally placed to answer because it can take those sort of that one further step that you
[Guest]: need to take.
[Guest]: Like Ursula K. Le Guin, The Left Hand of Darkness, about gender and about identity and politics
[Guest]: of gender.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm sometimes like, I'm not a hard science fiction reader in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: I'm probably very ignorant about most of science fiction.
[Amit Varma]: But I do find that it's really unfair to sort of knock something as, oh, this is a genre,
[Unknown]: like this is sci-fi, or this is crime mystery, or this is whatever.
[Amit Varma]: When you are asking the big questions and you're doing everything literature should
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: That I think makes sense.
[Guest]: But other than that, I don't think I can read a thriller at least.
[Guest]: I read it when I had to read Puzo and Sydney Sheldon, which I love.
[Guest]: And for the longest time, I thought it was a woman.
[Amit Varma]: Then I figured no.
[Amit Varma]: Did your uncle pass on his love of Alastair Maclean to you?
[Guest]: No, I just cannot.
[Guest]: All those guns and weapons and wars, I just cannot.
[Amit Varma]: I find it extremely boring.
[Amit Varma]: Right now, I'll read out a poem now because we have to get to your next poem.
[Amit Varma]: Before that, we'll have to.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, this is by a poet called CP Savafi.
[Guest]: Oh, yes.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, of course, this particular poem is translated by Edmund Keeley and is called
[Amit Varma]: The City.
[Amit Varma]: And much of the first part is actually a quote.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll say stop quote at the end of it, as I usually do.
[Amit Varma]: But that doesn't mean I have stopped.
[Amit Varma]: It means a poem has moved on from the quote to the normal thing.
[Amit Varma]: The City by Constantine Cavafy.
[Amit Varma]: You said, quote, I'll go to another country, go to another shore, find another city better
[Amit Varma]: than this one.
[Amit Varma]: Whatever I try to do is fated to turn out wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And my heart lies buried like something dead.
[Amit Varma]: How long can I let my mind moulder in this place?
[Amit Varma]: Wherever I turn, wherever I look, I see the black ruins of my life here, where I've spent
[Amit Varma]: so many years, wasted them, destroyed them totally.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: The poem continues.
[Amit Varma]: You won't find a new country, won't find another shore.
[Amit Varma]: Won't find another shore.
[Amit Varma]: The city will always pursue you.
[Amit Varma]: You'll walk the same streets, grow old in the same neighborhoods, turn gray in the same
[Amit Varma]: houses.
[Amit Varma]: You'll always end up in the city.
[Amit Varma]: Don't hope for things elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: There's no ship for you.
[Amit Varma]: There's no road.
[Amit Varma]: Now that you wasted your life here, in this small corner, you've destroyed it everywhere
[Amit Varma]: in the world.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: It's just something else.
[Guest]: Spectacular.
[Guest]: Indeed.
[Guest]: Spectacular indeed.
[Guest]: Reminds me of Ishiguro, for some strange reason, this poem took me to Ishiguro immediately
[Guest]: and never let me go.
[Guest]: I don't know why.
[Guest]: It just happened.
[Guest]: I think something's just, and we have to go and reread.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting, you were mentioning how you would go to British Council every
[Amit Varma]: weekend.
[Amit Varma]: I discovered Ishiguro in these summers in the early 90s, when I was in the hostel in
[Amit Varma]: Ferguson College, Pune, and I'd walk over for the air conditioning to the British Council
[Unknown]: library nearby.
[Guest]: And so I read his early books, The Remains of the Day, A Pale View of Hills.
[Guest]: I discovered Actwood also in the British Library.
[Guest]: Oh, okay.
[Guest]: There you go.
[Guest]: So there you go.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Otherwise, I didn't know of her.
[Guest]: So very interesting.
[Guest]: I mean, you don't know of anyone till you know of them.
[Guest]: Till you know of them, that's true.
[Guest]: I just, you know, there's this other quote, I'm sorry, I'm quoting.
[Guest]: It's called Mother of Pearl by Melinda Haynes, which is about a black man falling in love
[Guest]: or taking care of a 16, 17 year old white trash girl, so to say, as it happens in the
[Guest]: book, and how the delicate tender relationship they share.
[Guest]: So there's a quote from the book that just stands out completely.
[Guest]: And I love it because it's so relevant to the book that I've written.
[Guest]: And so I want to...
[Guest]: Go ahead, please.
[Guest]: So going by what you do, start quote.
[Amit Varma]: Or just quote instead of quote, not start quote.
[Guest]: Sometimes partial kindness kills a person as bad as partial knowing.
[Guest]: Judy said this while she hugged the dress.
[Guest]: But then sometimes partial kindness and partial knowing is the two best things in the world.
[Guest]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: So given that my book is about kindness in a way and knowing in a way.
[Guest]: So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: How do you feel about your book now that it's kind of out there?
[Guest]: Like you've been a reader throughout and now this is actually your own book.
[Guest]: I felt I want to disassociate myself from the book only because I feel I'm not done
[Guest]: justice in terms of writing.
[Guest]: And then when people quote to me from my book, or they tweet at me with lines from the book,
[Guest]: I feel very awkward.
[Amit Varma]: I am hereby going to make you feel awkward.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to interrupt you and I'm going to read out this very nice sentence from page
[Amit Varma]: three that early the good writing starts.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, and she was like how the matriarch of a good South Bombay household should be
[Amit Varma]: honorable and relentless in putting others down, even if it was her own family.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: That's a very nice sentence.
[Guest]: I like it.
[Guest]: Kerala matriarch actually came to mind when I was writing, but she was like that.
[Guest]: From what I've also heard, my grandmother was extremely stern and staunch.
[Guest]: I think people also to go in a different trajectory.
[Guest]: When they came from Pakistan to India, I think they became hard in the process.
[Guest]: They lost their softness, they lost their innocence.
[Guest]: And she was married off really early to my grandfather as young as she was 11.
[Guest]: And then when you are young and you experience such pain in leaving home and leaving family,
[Guest]: I think it just hardens you to a very large extent.
[Guest]: And then for you to show what you really feel and express yourself so difficult.
[Guest]: And now I understand this, of course, about a lot of people, which earlier I wouldn't.
[Guest]: But back to this, I find it very awkward now that the book is out, honestly, because I
[Guest]: don't know how to deal with it.
[Guest]: I don't know what to do with it.
[Guest]: And then I'm like, just like either I soak in what it has to offer or just rejected like
[Guest]: a stepchild and not look at it ever again.
[Guest]: But didn't that happen to you when your book came out?
[Amit Varma]: I think it, as I think I've told you, I wish it had never come out.
[Guest]: So there you go, it's the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, I think I let myself down.
[Guest]: No, so when you read so much, Amit, I also feel that you want to, like, I want one perfect
[Guest]: sentence.
[Guest]: I can't find a single perfect sentence in my book.
[Guest]: I just read one out.
[Guest]: No, I just want to be like, when you read Munro and then you read Atwood, you read Murakami,
[Guest]: you read people from other languages, writing so beautifully, like Marquez or Isabel Allende
[Guest]: and all those people.
[Guest]: And you're like, wow, what writing.
[Guest]: Who are the Indian writers you like?
[Guest]: I love, I absolutely admire Shanta Gokhale.
[Guest]: I love Shashidesh Pandey.
[Guest]: I love Ghosh's earlier work.
[Guest]: I absolutely adore Vikram Seth, Eunice, a big, big, big influence in my life, through
[Guest]: her writing and through the way she was as a person.
[Guest]: She taught you?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, but, but, but, yeah, but great.
[Guest]: Just, just absolutely brilliant woman, who Indian, who else do I love?
[Guest]: I love Niranjana Roy's writing.
[Guest]: When, when I read how she talks about cats and the love that she projects into her books
[Guest]: about them, it just makes my heart sing.
[Amit Varma]: I absolutely love her writing.
[Amit Varma]: Very good friend of mine.
[Amit Varma]: And she's just finished her new book.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: But it's not about cats.
[Guest]: I know, but still I can't wait for it.
[Guest]: It's about crime in Haryana.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I like Annie Zehdi's work.
[Guest]: I mean, it's like deceptively simple.
[Amit Varma]: Her new novel's just out?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, Prelude to Arrive.
[Amit Varma]: Have you read it?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: I enjoyed it a lot.
[Guest]: So I also like Anita Nair, something magical about her writing.
[Guest]: But, but yeah, I look at it from a distance and I love what she does.
[Amit Varma]: And given that you're in Bombay, and I presume that you also do the Lit Festival circuit a
[Amit Varma]: little bit, you must be meeting writers that you've read and then you meet them.
[Amit Varma]: And how is that experience?
[Guest]: Is it like, does it change the way you look at it?
[Guest]: You know, I met Andar Jai in Jaipur, and like a fool, I told him to sign on a page of the
[Guest]: English patient that I loved so much, that one line, that if I give my heart to you,
[Guest]: will you break it?
[Guest]: Or something to that effect, if I give you my heart, I hope you get what I'm saying.
[Guest]: He refused to do that.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because he's like, oh, I don't want to sign in the middle of a book.
[Guest]: And I made him and he gave me the dirty look.
[Guest]: And then right after he signed, he didn't sign for me, he didn't say for Vivek, he just
[Guest]: said, whatever, scribbled something, his initials or whatever.
[Guest]: In a very dramatic moment, I just gave the book to somebody else and I walked out from
[Guest]: there in front of him.
[Guest]: Ouch.
[Guest]: But I didn't expect that from him.
[Guest]: I love the guy and I still will always love what he writes and I will pick up what he
[Guest]: writes.
[Amit Varma]: That's churlish of him.
[Guest]: Yeah, but I didn't like the way he behaved.
[Amit Varma]: So I think never meet your heroes, never meet your heroes.
[Amit Varma]: You've met Alice Munro, you once told me.
[Guest]: Yes, I have, it was beautiful.
[Unknown]: It was in Canada.
[Guest]: I had gone there for something else and I just happened to be in the bookshop where
[Unknown]: she was reading.
[Guest]: I'm very rare that she does this.
[Guest]: But I was just very honored to do that.
[Guest]: I got my copy signed and she was very gracious about the meeting and it was something else
[Guest]: altogether.
[Amit Varma]: You should have given her the English patient and asked her to sign on that line to see
[Guest]: if she does it.
[Guest]: Yeah, she even liked the book.
[Unknown]: I know I loved it.
[Guest]: I still like Andarje a lot, his writing, but I don't think I want to meet him.
[Guest]: We all have feet of clay and it's very scary.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I don't want to.
[Guest]: Yeah, but I still want to idealize them.
[Guest]: And that I'll never stop doing.
[Amit Varma]: Your turn to read a poem.
[Guest]: Yeah, sorry.
[Guest]: And last I have with me, it's called Possibilities by this writer called, I don't know how to
[Guest]: pronounce her name, Vistlava Simborska.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I don't know how to pronounce her name either.
[Amit Varma]: It's called Possibilities.
[Guest]: I'll be very quick with it.
[Guest]: I prefer movies.
[Guest]: I prefer cats.
[Guest]: I prefer the oaks along the water.
[Guest]: I prefer Dickens to Dostoevsky.
[Guest]: I prefer myself liking people to myself loving mankind.
[Guest]: I prefer keeping a needle and thread on hand just in case.
[Guest]: I prefer the color green.
[Guest]: I prefer not to maintain that reason is to blame for everything.
[Guest]: I prefer exceptions.
[Guest]: I prefer to leave early.
[Guest]: I prefer the old fine line illustrations.
[Guest]: I prefer the absurdity of writing poems to the absurdity of not writing poems.
[Guest]: I prefer where love's concerned, non-specific anniversaries that can be celebrated every day.
[Guest]: I prefer cunning kindness to the over-trustful kind.
[Guest]: I prefer conquered to conquering countries.
[Guest]: I prefer having some reservations.
[Guest]: I prefer Grimm's fairy tales to the newspaper's front pages.
[Guest]: I prefer leaves without flowers to flowers without leaves.
[Guest]: I prefer dogs with uncropped tails.
[Guest]: I prefer light eyes since mine are dark.
[Guest]: I prefer many things that I haven't mentioned here to many things I've also left unsaid.
[Guest]: I prefer zeros on the loose to those lined up behind a cipher.
[Guest]: I prefer the time of insects to the time of stars.
[Guest]: I prefer to knock on wood.
[Guest]: I prefer not to ask how much longer and when.
[Guest]: I prefer keeping in mind even the possibility that existence has its own reason for being.
[Guest]: Just stunning.
[Guest]: She's so good.
[Guest]: That's just stunning.
[Guest]: And to think that she writes in Polish.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And the translation is wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: And translation is another fine art by itself because the languages are just so inherently
[Amit Varma]: different.
[Amit Varma]: Just thought of, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And to find that word.
[Guest]: Yeah, and that phrase that will connect with the reader.
[Amit Varma]: Or more so just the essence of something like, and that's something I've often wondered about
[Amit Varma]: that languages have their own inherent qualities.
[Amit Varma]: For example, like I mentioned earlier, I think most Japanese writers I read tend to be quite
[Amit Varma]: minimal and sparse and perhaps that's a quality in the language.
[Amit Varma]: But equally, a lot of the Urdu shairi I love is so overflown and, you know, expressionistic.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, if you translate them literally, they read like shit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: That's true.
[Amit Varma]: In English, they're like shit, because we are attaching a different set, not a better
[Amit Varma]: set, but a different set of values to it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: A different set of heuristics.
[Guest]: Completely agree.
[Guest]: Like, I never want fairs to be translated in English ever.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, because it'll be like, what just kind of...
[Guest]: I'll never read him in English.
[Guest]: Can never think of it in English.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Or Mir or anyone for that matter.
[Unknown]: Amrita Pritam.
[Guest]: Never, can never.
[Guest]: From Punjabi to English, it just wouldn't make sense.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: If somebody tried to translate meh tenu phir milangi, it was a disaster.
[Amit Varma]: I was like, don't, don't even bother.
[Amit Varma]: I shall meet you again.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I'll be back.
[Guest]: That was, I mean, that's basically Schwarzenegger saying meh tenu phir milangi milanga.
[Guest]: Now there's a new Terminator movie.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: The Punjabi dubbed version should kindly have these.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, very true.
[Guest]: I think we've reached the two hour mark.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll finish off a poem and then we'll have some final words.
[Amit Varma]: This one is a traditional rhyming type poetry.
[Amit Varma]: So if you guys are wondering what the hell is happening here.
[Amit Varma]: Rhyme kyu nahi karda?
[Amit Varma]: This one.
[Amit Varma]: Rhyme karda.
[Amit Varma]: This is called A Long Distance Too by Tony Harrison.
[Unknown]: Have you?
[Unknown]: No.
[Amit Varma]: Long Distance Too by Tony Harrison.
[Amit Varma]: Though my mother was already two years dead, dad kept her slippers warming by the gas,
[Amit Varma]: put hot water bottles aside of the bed and still went to renew her transport pass.
[Amit Varma]: You couldn't just drop in, you had to phone.
[Amit Varma]: He'd put you off an hour to give him time to clear away her things and look alone,
[Amit Varma]: as though his still raw love was such a crime.
[Amit Varma]: He couldn't risk my blight of disbelief, though sure that very soon he'd hear her key,
[Amit Varma]: scrape in the rusted lock and end his grief.
[Amit Varma]: He knew she'd just popped out to get the tea.
[Amit Varma]: I believe life ends with death and that is all.
[Amit Varma]: You haven't both gone shopping.
[Amit Varma]: Just the same.
[Amit Varma]: In my new black leather phone book, there's your name and the disconnected number I still call.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, lovely.
[Unknown]: It's so good.
[Amit Varma]: And if you see it on the page, it's very interesting what he's done here.
[Amit Varma]: If you see it on the page, it's got four stanzas.
[Amit Varma]: The first three have this rhyme scheme of ABAB and the last one is ABBA.
[Amit Varma]: And that actually makes a sort of difference in just the effect that the poem has.
[Guest]: It just touches, that's all.
[Guest]: Yeah, very moving.
[Guest]: I don't know if you, Brian Patton, I don't know if you've heard of him.
[Amit Varma]: Wasn't he?
[Amit Varma]: No, no, Chris Patton was in charge of Hong Kong when they handed over.
[Guest]: Brian Patton writes poetry just like this.
[Guest]: It's just beautiful.
[Guest]: Very, very touching.
[Guest]: Very soft.
[Guest]: I find, you know, in poetry, which is so strange, I find male poets also to have that sense of
[Guest]: softness sometimes, most of the time.
[Guest]: They're not harsh.
[Guest]: Like when that happens a lot, I find that in prose, when it comes to men who write,
[Guest]: I find that prose sometimes very jarring, like Richard Ford.
[Guest]: I don't find him making a point softly, like Murakami will make a point softly.
[Guest]: So I think maybe because of the culture, maybe, I don't know, it'll be very interesting to
[Guest]: find out why.
[Amit Varma]: But have you read Mary Oliver's poetry?
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And have you read this wonderful book, which I recommend all my listeners go out and just
[Amit Varma]: buy right now, blindly, just trust me.
[Amit Varma]: But it is called a Poetry Handbook.
[Amit Varma]: By her only.
[Guest]: By Mary Oliver.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Where she talks about, I mean, that got me to appreciate poetry so much more just in
[Amit Varma]: terms of how poets do their thing and.
[Guest]: The style and the craft more than anything.
[Guest]: Even this lady, Anne Lamott, if I'm not mistaken.
[Guest]: Isn't it the lady who wrote the book called One Bird at a Time?
[Guest]: Bird by Bird.
[Guest]: Just Bird by Bird.
[Guest]: That's on the craft of writing.
[Amit Varma]: Which is on the craft of writing, which is a lovely story.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the story that from which the book gets its title is that when they were kids,
[Amit Varma]: she and her little brother, they were with the family at a summer cabin.
[Amit Varma]: And by the time the vacation got over, the kid had to do this sort of homework project
[Amit Varma]: where he had to, I think, describe birds or paste pictures of birds on a scrapbook or
[Amit Varma]: whatever by the end of the holiday, and they had ample time to do it.
[Amit Varma]: But like all of us who face deadlines and react to them the same way as they go, Wu Xing Bai,
[Amit Varma]: he basically left it for the very last day.
[Amit Varma]: And then the little kid had a near panic attack on the last day because there were so many
[Amit Varma]: birds.
[Amit Varma]: And her dad told him just do it, Bird by Bird.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And that was it.
[Amit Varma]: And in that vein, I hope that Bird by Bird, you shall also get to your next book and to
[Amit Varma]: many more books.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for inviting me.
[Guest]: It was a pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks a lot.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Unknown]: Thank you.